Printing, in the only sense with which we are at present concerned, differs from most if not from all the arts and crafts represented in the Exhibition
in being comparatively modern.
For although the Chinese took impressions from wood blocks engraved in relief for centuries before the woodcutters of the Netherlands, by a similar process
produced the block books, which were the immediate predecessors of the true printed book,
the invention of movable metal letters in the middle of the fifteenth century may justly be considered as the invention of the art of printing.
And it is worth mention in passing that, as an example of fine typography,
the earliest book printed with movable types, the Gutenberg, or "forty-two line Bible" of about 1455,
has never been surpassed.
Printing, then, for our purpose, may be considered as the art of making books by means of movable types.
Now, as all books not primarily intended as picture-books consist principally of types composed to form letterpress,
it is of the first importance that the letter used should be fine in form;
especially as no more time is occupied, or cost incurred, in casting, setting, or printing beautiful letters
than in the same operations with ugly ones.
And it was a matter of course that in the Middle Ages, when the craftsmen took care that beautiful form should always be a part of their productions whatever they were,
the forms of printed letters should be beautiful, and that their arrangement on the page should be reasonable and a help to the shapeliness of the letters themselves.
The Middle Ages brought calligraphy to perfection, and it was natural therefore
that the forms of printed letters should follow more or less closely those of the written character, and they followed them very closely.
The first books were printed in black letter, i.e. the letter which was a Gothic development of the ancient Roman character,
and which developed more completely and satisfactorily on the side of the "lower-case" than the capital letters;
the "lower-case" being in fact invented in the early Middle Ages.
The earliest book printed with movable type, the aforesaid Gutenberg Bible, is printed in letters which are an exact imitation
of the more formal ecclesiastical writing which obtained at that time; this has since been called "missal type,"
and was in fact the kind of letter used in the many splendid missals, psalters, etc., produced by printing in the fifteenth century.
But the first Bible actually dated (which also was printed at Maintz by Peter Schoeffer in the year 1462)
imitates a much freer hand, simpler, rounder, and less spiky, and therefore far pleasanter and easier to read.
On the whole the type of this book may be considered the ne-plus-ultra of Gothic type,
especially as regards the lower-case letters; and type very similar was used during the next fifteen or twenty years not only by Schoeffer,
but by printers in Strasburg, Basle, Paris, Lubeck, and other cities.
But though on the whole, except in Italy, Gothic letter was most often used
a very few years saw the birth of Roman character not only in Italy, but in Germany and France.
In 1465 Sweynheim and Pannartz began printing in the monastery of Subiaco near Rome,
and used an exceedingly beautiful type, which is indeed to look at a transition between Gothic and Roman,
but which must certainly have come from the study of the twelfth or even the eleventh century MSS.
They printed very few books in this type, three only; but in their very first books in Rome, beginning with the year 1468,
they discarded this for a more completely Roman and far less beautiful letter.
But about the same year Mentelin at Strasburg began to print in a type which is distinctly Roman;
and the next year Gunther Zeiner at Augsburg followed suit;
while in 1470 at Paris Udalric Gering and his associates turned out the first books printed in France, also in Roman character.
The Roman type of all these printers is similar in character,
and is very simple and legible, and unaffectedly designed for use; but it is by no means without beauty.
It must be said that it is in no way like the transition type of Subiaco,
and though more Roman than that, yet scarcely more like the complete Roman type of the earliest printers of Rome.
A further development of the Roman letter took place at Venice.
John of Spires and his brother Vindelin, followed by Nicholas Jenson, began to print in that city,
1469, 1470;
their type is on the lines of the German and French rather than of the Roman printers.
Of Jenson it must be said that he carried the development of Roman type as far as it can go:
his letter is admirably clear and regular, but at least as beautiful as any other Roman type.
After his death in the "fourteen eighties," or at least by 1490, printing in Venice had declined very much;
and though the famous family of Aldus restored its technical excellence, rejecting battered letters,
and paying great attention to the "press work" or actual process of printing,
yet their type is artistically on a much lower level than Jenson's, and in fact
they must be considered to have ended the age of fine printing in Italy.
Jenson, however, had many contemporaries who used beautiful type,
some of which -- as, e.g., that of Jacobus Rubeus or Jacques le Rouge -- is scarcely distinguishable from his.
It was these great Venetian printers, together with their brethren of Rome, Milan,
Parma, and one or two other cities, who produced the splendid editions of the Classics, which are one of the great glories of the printer's art,
and are worthy representatives of the eager enthusiasm for the revived learning of that epoch. By far,
the greater part of these Italian printers, it should be mentioned, were Germans or Frenchmen, working under the influence of Italian opinion and aims.
It must be understood that through the whole of the fifteenth and the first quarter of the sixteenth centuries
the Roman letter was used side by side with the Gothic.
Even in Italy most of the theological and law books were printed in Gothic letter,
which was generally more formally Gothic than the printing of the German workmen,
many of whose types, indeed, like that of the Subiaco works, are of a transitional character.
This was notably the case with the early works printed at Ulm, and in a somewhat lesser degree at Augsburg.
In fact Gunther Zeiner's first type (afterwards used by Schussler) is remarkably like the type of the before-mentioned Subiaco books.
In the Low Countries and Cologne, which were very fertile of printed books, Gothic was the favorite.
The characteristic Dutch type, as represented by the excellent printer Gerard Leew, is very pronounced and uncompromising Gothic.
This type was introduced into England by Wynkyn de Worde, Caxton's successor,
and was used there with very little variation all through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and indeed into the eighteenth.
Most of Caxton's own types are of an earlier character, though they also much resemble Flemish or Cologne letter.
After the end of the fifteenth century the degradation of printing, especially in Germany and Italy,
went on apace; and by the end of the sixteenth century there was no really beautiful printing done:
the best, mostly French or Low-Country, was neat and clear, but without any distinction;
the worst, which perhaps was the English, was a terrible falling-off from the work of the earlier presses;
and things got worse and worse through the whole of the seventeenth century, so that in the eighteenth printing was very miserably performed.
In England about this time, an attempt was made (notably by Caslon, who started business in London as a type-founder in 1720)
to improve the letter in form.
Caslon's type is clear and neat, and fairly well designed;
he seems to have taken the letter of the Elzevirs of the seventeenth century for his model:
type cast from his matrices is still in everyday use.
In spite, however, of his praiseworthy efforts, printing had still one last degradation to undergo.
The seventeenth century founts were bad rather negatively than positively.
But for the beauty of the earlier work they might have seemed tolerable.
It was reserved for the founders of the later eighteenth century to produce letters which are positively ugly, and which, it may be added,
are dazzling and unpleasant to the eye owing to the clumsy thickening and vulgar thinning of the lines:
for the seventeenth-century letters are at least pure and simple in line. The Italian, Bodoni, and the Frenchman, Didot,
were the leaders in this luckless change, though our own Baskerville, who was at work some years before them, went much on the same lines;
but his letters, though uninteresting and poor, are not nearly so gross and vulgar as those of either the Italian or the Frenchman.
With this change the art of printing touched bottom,
so far as fine printing is concerned, though paper did not get to its worst till about 1840.
The Chiswick press in 1844 revived Caslon's founts, printing for Messrs. Longman the Diary of Lady Willoughby.
This experiment was so far successful that about 1850 Messrs. Miller and Richard of Edinburgh
were induced to cut punches for a series of "old style" letters.
These and similar founts, cast by the above firm and others,
have now come into general use and are obviously a great improvement on the ordinary "modern style" in use in England, which is in fact the Bodoni type
a little reduced in ugliness. The design of the letters of this modern "old style" leaves a good deal to be desired,
and the whole effect is a little too gray, owing to the thinness of the letters.
It must be remembered, however, that most modern printing is done by machinery on soft paper, and not by the hand press,
and these somewhat wiry letters are suitable for the machine process, which would not do justice to letters of more generous design.
It is discouraging to note that the improvement of the last fifty years is almost wholly confined to Great Britain.
Here and there a book is printed in France or Germany with some pretension to good taste,
but the general revival of the old forms has made no way in those countries.
Italy is contentedly stagnant.
America has produced a good many showy books, the typography, paper, and illustrations of which are, however, all wrong,
oddity rather than rational beauty and meaning being apparently the thing sought for both in the letters and the illustrations.
To say a few words on the principles of design in typography:
it is obvious that legibility is the first thing to be aimed at in the forms of the letters;
this is best furthered by the avoidance of irrational swellings and spiky projections, and by the using of careful purity of line.
Even the Caslon type when enlarged shows great shortcomings in this respect:
the ends of many of the letters such as the t and e are hooked up in a vulgar and meaningless way,
instead of ending in the sharp and clear stroke of Jenson's letters;
there is a grossness in the upper finishings of letters like the c, the a, and so on,
an ugly pear-shaped swelling defacing the form of the letter:
in short, it happens to this craft, as to others, that the utilitarian practice, though it professes to avoid ornament,
still clings to a foolish, because misunderstood conventionality, deduced from what was once ornament, and is by no means useful;
which title can only be claimed by artistic practice, whether the art in it be conscious or unconscious.
In no characters is the contrast between the ugly and vulgar illegibility of the modern type
and the elegance and legibility of the ancient more striking than in the Arabic numerals.
In the old print each figure has its definite individuality, and one cannot be mistaken for the other;
in reading the modern figures the eyes must be strained before the reader can have any reasonable assurance
that he has a 5, an 8, or a 3 before him, unless the press work is of the best:
this is awkward if you have to read Bradshaw's Guide in a hurry.
One of the differences between the fine type and the utilitarian must probably be put down to a misapprehension of a commercial necessity:
this is the narrowing of the modern letters.
Most of Jenson's letters are designed within a square,
the modern letters are narrowed by a third or thereabout; but while this gain of space very much hampers the possibility of beauty of design,
it is not a real gain, for the modern printer throws the gain away by putting inordinately wide spaces between his lines, which, probably,
the lateral compression of his letters renders necessary.
Commercialism again compels the use of type too small in size to be comfortable reading:
the size known as "Long primer" ought to be the smallest size used in a book meant to be read.
Here, again, if the practice of "leading" were retrenched larger type could be used without enhancing the price of a book.
One very important matter in "setting up" for fine printing is the "spacing," that is, the lateral distance of words from one another.
In good printing the spaces between the words should be as near as possible equal
it is impossible that they should be quite equal except in lines of poetry
modern printers understand this, but it is only practiced in the very best establishments.
But another point which they should attend to they almost always disregard;
this is the tendency to the formation of ugly meandering white lines or "rivers" in the page
a blemish which can be nearly, though not wholly, avoided by care and forethought
the desirable thing being "the breaking of the line" as in bonding masonry or brickwork
The general solidity of a page is much to be sought for
modern printers generally overdo the "whites" in the spacing, a defect probably forced on them by the characterless quality of the letters.
For where these are boldly and carefully designed, and each letter is thoroughly individual in form,
the words may be set much closer together, without loss of clearness.
No definite rules, however, except the avoidance of "rivers" and excess of white, can be given for the spacing,
which requires the constant exercise of judgment and taste on the part of the printer.
The position of the page on the paper should be considered if the book is to have a satisfactory look.
Here once more the almost invariable modern practice is in opposition to a natural sense of proportion.
From the time when books first took their present shape till the end of the sixteenth century, or indeed later,
the page so lay on the paper that there was more space allowed to the bottom and fore margin than to the top and back of the paper,
the unit of the book being looked on as the two pages forming an opening.
The modern printer, in the teeth of the evidence given by his own eyes, considers the single page as the unit, and prints the page in the middle of his paper
only nominally so, however, in many cases, since when he uses a headline he counts that in,
the result as measured by the eye being that the lower margin is less than the top one, and that the whole opening has an upside-down look vertically
and that laterally the page looks as if it were being driven off the paper.
The paper on which the printing is to be done is a necessary part of our subject:
of this it may be said that though there is some good paper made now,
it is never used except for very expensive books, although it would not materially increase the cost in all but the very cheapest.
The paper that is used for ordinary books is exceedingly bad even in this country, but is beaten in the race for vileness
by that made in America, which is the worst conceivable.
There seems to be no reason why ordinary paper should not be better made,
even allowing the necessity for a very low price; but any improvement must be based on showing openly that the cheap article is cheap,
e.g. the cheap paper should not sacrifice toughness and durability to a smooth and white surface,
which should be indications of a delicacy of material and manufacture which would of necessity increase its cost.
One fruitful source of badness in paper
is the habit that publishers have of eking out a thin volume by printing it on thick paper almost of the substance of cardboard,
a device which deceives nobody, and makes a book very unpleasant to read.
On the whole, a small book should be printed on paper which is as thin as may be without being transparent.
The paper used for printing the small highly ornamented French service-books about the beginning of the sixteenth century is a model in this respect,
being thin, tough, and opaque.
However, the fact must not be blinked that machine-made paper cannot in the nature of things be made of so good a texture as that made by hand.
The ornamentation of printed books is too wide a subject to be dealt with fully here; but one thing must be said on it.
The essential point to be remembered is that the ornament, whatever it is, whether picture or pattern-work, should form part of the page,
should be a part of the whole scheme of the book.
Simple as this proposition is, it is necessary to be stated,
because the modern practice is to disregard the relation between the printing and the ornament altogether,
so that if the two are helpful to one another it is a mere matter of accident.
The due relation of letter to pictures and other ornament was thoroughly understood by the old printers; so that
even when the woodcuts are very rude indeed,
the proportions of the page still give pleasure by the sense of richness that the cuts and letter together convey.
When, as is most often the case, there is actual beauty in the cuts,
the books so ornamented are amongst the most delightful works of art that have ever been produced.
Therefore, granted well-designed type, due spacing of the lines and words, and proper position of the page on the paper,
all books might be at least comely and well-looking: and if to these good qualities were added really beautiful ornament and pictures,
printed books might once again illustrate to the full
the position of our Society that a work of utility might be also a work of art, if we cared to make it so.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 4: Newgate down to 1818.
Under the conditions referred to in the previous chapter,
with criminals and misdemeanants of all shades crowding perpetually into its narrow limits, the latter state of Newgate was worse than the first.
The new jail fell as far short of the demands made on it as did the old.
The prison population fluctuated a great deal,
but it was almost always in excess of the accommodation available, and there were times when the place was full to overflowing.
Neild gives some figures which well illustrate this.
On the 14th June, 1800, there were 199 debtors and 289 felons in the prison.
On the 27th April, in the following year,
these numbers had risen to 275 and 375 respectively, or 650 in all.
For two more years these high figures were steadily maintained, and in 1803 the total rose to 710.
After that they fell as steadily,
till, 1808, the lowest point was touched of 197 debtors and 182 felons, or 379 in all.
The numbers soon increased, however, and by 1811 had again risen to 629; and Mr. Neild was told that there had been at one time
300 debtors and 900 criminals in Newgate, or twelve hundred prisoners in all.
Previous to that date there had been 700 or 800 frequently, and once, in Mr. Akerman's time, one thousand.
Trustworthy evidence is forthcoming to the effect that these high figures were constantly maintained for many months at a time.
The inadequacy of the jail was noticed and reported upon again and again by the grand juries of the city of London,
who seldom let a session go by without visiting Newgate.
In 1813
the grand jury made a special presentment to the Court of Common Council, pointing out that on the debtors' side, which was intended for only 100,
no less than 340 were crowded, to the great inconvenience and danger of the inmates.
On the female side matters were much worse;
Quote. the apartments set apart for them, being built to accommodate 60 persons, now contain about 120. End quote.
Returns laid before the House of Commons showed that 6439 persons had been committed to Newgate
in the three years between 1813 and 1816,
and this number did not include the debtors, a numerous class, who were still committed to Newgate pending the completion of the White Cross Street prison.
In order to realize the evils entailed by incarceration in Newgate in these days, it is necessary to give some account of its interior
as it was occupied and appropriated in 1810.
Full details of the arrangements are to be found in Mr. Neild's "State of Prisons in England, Scotland, and Wales," published in 1812.
The jail at that date was divided into eight separate and more or less distinct departments, each of which had its own wards and yard.
These were: 1. The male debtors' side.
2. The female debtors' side. 3. The chapel yard. 4. The middle yard.
5. The master felons' side. 6. The female felons' side. 7. The state side.
8. The press yard.
1. The male debtors' side consisted of a yard forty-nine feet by thirty-one,
leading to thirteen wards on various floors, and a day room.
Of these wards, three were appropriated to the "cabin side," so called because
they each contained four small rooms or "cabins" seven feet square,
intended to accommodate a couple of prisoners apiece, but often much more crowded.
Two other wards were appropriated to the master's side debtors; they were each twenty-three feet by fourteen and a half,
and supposed to accommodate twenty persons. The eight remaining wards were for the common side debtors,
long narrow rooms -- one thirty-six feet, six twenty-three feet, and the eighth eighteen,
the whole about fifteen feet wide.
The various wards were all about eleven feet in height,
and were occupied as a rule by ten to fifteen people when the prison was not crowded, but double the number was occasionally placed in them.
The day room was fitted with benches and settles after the manner of the tap in a public-house.
2. The female debtors' side consisted of a court-yard forty-nine by sixteen feet,
leading to two wards, one of which was thirty-six feet by fifteen,
and the other eighteen by fifteen; and they nominally held twenty-two persons.
A high wall fifteen feet in height divided the females' court-yard from the men's.
3. The chapel yard was about forty-three feet by twenty-five.
It had been for some time devoted principally to felons of the worst types,
those who were the oldest offenders, sentenced to transportation, and who had narrowly escaped the penalty of death.
This arrangement was, however, modified after 1811, and the chapel yard was allotted to misdemeanants and prisoners awaiting trial.
The wards in this part were five in number, all in dimensions twenty feet by fifteen, with a sixth ward fifteen feet square.
These wards were all fitted with barrack-beds, but no bedding was supplied.
The chapel yard led to the chapel, and on the staircase were two rooms frequently set apart for the king's witnesses,
those who had turned king's evidence, whose safety might have been imperiled had they been lodged with the men against whom they had informed.
But these king's witnesses were also put at times into the press yard among the capital convicts, seemingly a very dangerous proceeding,
or they lodged with the gatesmen, the prisoner officers who had charge of the inner gates.
The middle yard was at first given up to the least heinous offenders. After 1812 it changed functions with the chapel yard.
It was fifty feet by twenty-five, and had five wards each thirty-eight by fifteen. At one end of the yard was an arcade,
directly under the chapel, in which there were three cells, used either for the confinement of disorderly and refractory prisoners,
or female convicts ordered for execution.
The master felons' side consisted of a yard the same size as the preceding, appropriated nominally to the most decent and better-behaved prisoners,
but really kept for the few who had funds sufficient to gain them admission to these more comfortable quarters.
Here were also lodged the gatesmen, the prisoners who had charge of the inner gates, and who were entrusted with the duty of escorting visitors from the gates
to the various wards their friends occupied.
The state side was the part stolen from the female felons' side.
It was large and comparatively commodious, being maintained on a better footing than any other part of the prison.
The inmates were privileged, either by antecedents or the fortunate possession of sufficient funds to pay the charges of the place.
Neild takes it for granted that the former rather than the latter prevailed in the selection,
and tells us that in the state side, quote, such prisoners were safely associated whose manners and conduct evince a more liberal style of education,
and who are therefore lodged apart from all other districts of the jail. End quote.
The state side contained twelve good-sized rooms,
from twenty-one by eighteen feet to fifteen feet square, which were furnished with bedsteads and bedding.
7. The press yard was that part set aside for the condemned.
Its name and its situation were the same as those of the old place of carrying out the terrible sentence inflicted on accused persons who stood mute.
The long narrow yard still remained as we saw it in Jacobite times,
and beyond it was now a day room for the capital convicts or those awaiting execution.
Beyond the press yard were three stories, condemned cells, fifteen in all, with vaulted ceilings nine feet high to the crown of the arch.
The ground floor cells were nine feet by six;
those on the first floor were rather larger on account of a set-off in the wall; and the uppermost were the largest, for the same reason.
Security was provided for in these condemned cells by lining the substantial stone walls with planks studded with broad-headed nails;
they were lighted by a double-grated window two feet nine inches by fourteen inches; and in the doors, which were four inches thick,
a circular aperture had been let in to give ventilation and secure a free current of air.
In each cell there was a barrack bedstead on the floor without bedding.
8. The female felons were deprived of part of the space which the architect had intended for them.
More than half their quadrangle had been partitioned off for another purpose,
and what remained was divided into a master's and a common side for female felons.
The two yards were adjoining, that for the common side much the largest.
There were nine wards in all on the female side, one of them in the attic,
with four casements and two fireplaces, being allotted for a female infirmary
and the rest being provided with barrack beds, and in dimensions varying from thirty feet by fifteen to fifteen feet by ten.
The eight courts above enumerated were well supplied with water;
they had dust-bins, sewers, and so forth, "properly disposed," and the city scavenger paid periodical visits to the prison.
The prisoners had few comforts, beyond the occasional use of a bath at some distance, situated in the press yard,
to which access was granted rarely and as a great favor. But they were allowed the luxury of drink -- if they could pay for it.
A recent reform had closed the tap kept by the jailer within the precincts, but
there was still a "convenient room" which served, and, quote,
near it a grating through which the debtors receive their beer from the neighboring public-houses.
The felons' side has a similar accommodation, and this mode of introducing the beverage is adopted because no publican as such
can be permitted to enter the interior of this prison. End quote. The tap-room and bar were just behind the felons' entrance lodge,
and beyond it was a room called the "wine room," because formerly used for the sale of wine, but
in which latterly a copper had been fixed for the cooking of provisions sent in by charitable persons.
Quote, On the top of the jail, continues Neild, are a watch-house and a sentry-box, where two or more guards, with dogs and firearms,
watch all night. Adjoining the felons' side lodge is the keeper's office, where the prison books are kept, and his clerk,
called the clerk of the papers, attends daily. End quote.
Having thus briefly described the plan and appropriation of the prison, I propose to deal now with the general condition of the inmates, and the manner of their life.
Of these the debtors, male and female, formed a large proportion.
The frequency and extent of processes against debtors seventy or eighty years ago will appear almost incredible
in an age when insolvent acts and bankruptcy courts do so much to relieve the impecunious,
and imprisonment for debt has almost entirely disappeared.
The number of processes against debtors annually was extraordinary.
Neild gives, on the authority of Mr. Burchell, the under sheriff of Middlesex,
a table showing the figures for the year ending Michaelmas 1802.
In that period upwards of 200,000 writs
had been issued for the arrests of debtors in the kingdom, for sums varying from fourpence to £500 and upwards.
Fifteen thousand of these were issued in Middlesex alone, which at that time was reckoned as only a fifteenth of Great Britain.
The number of arrests actually made was 114,300 for the kingdom, and 7020 for Middlesex.
Barely half of these gave bail bonds on arrests, and the remainder went to prison.
Quite half of the foregoing writs and arrests applied to sums under £30.
Neild also says that in 1793,
5719 writs and executions for debts between £10 and £20 were issued in Middlesex,
and the aggregate amount of debts sued for was £81,791.
He also makes the curious calculation that the costs of these actions if undefended
would have amounted to £68,728, and if defended,
£285,950; in other words, that to recover eighty odd thousand pounds,
three times the amount would be expended.
An elaborate machinery planned for the protection of the trader, and altogether on his side, had long existed for the recovery of debts.
Alfred the Great established the Court Baron, the Hundred Court, and the County Court, which among other matters entertained pleas for debt.
The County Court was the sheriff's, who sat there surrounded by the bishop and the magnates of the county;
but as time passed, difficulties and delays in obtaining judgment led to the removal of causes to the great Court of King's Bench,
and the disuse of the inferior courts.
So much inconvenience ensued, that in 1518 the Corporation obtained from Parliament an act empowering two aldermen
and four common councilmen to hold Courts of Requests, or Courts of Conscience, to hear and determine all causes of debt
under 40 shillings arising within the city.
These courts were extended two centuries later to several large provincial towns, and all were in full activity when Neild wrote,
and indeed supplied the bulk of the poor debtors committed to prison.
These courts were open to many and grave objections.
The commissioners who presided were, quote, little otherwise than self-elected
and when once appointed continued to serve sine die; they were generally near in rank to the parties whose causes they decided.
Often a commissioner had to leave the bench because he was himself a party to the suit that was sub judice.
The activity as well as the futility of these courts may be estimated from the statement given by Neild
that thirteen hundred and twelve debtors were committed by them to Newgate between 1797 and 1808,
and that no more than 197 creditors recovered debts and costs.
The latter indeed hung like millstones round the neck of the unhappy insolvent wretches who found themselves in limbo.
Costs were the gallons of sack to the pennyworth of debt.
Neild found at his visit to Newgate in 1810,
fourteen men and women who had lain there ten, eleven, and thirteen years for debts of a few shillings,
weighted by treble the amount of costs.
Thus, amongst others, Thomas Blackburn had been committed on October 15th for a debt of 1 shilling 5 pence.
for which the costs were 6 shillings 10 pence.
Thomas Dobson, on 22nd August, 1799, for 1 shilling, with costs of 8 shillings, 10 pence.
and Susannah Evans, in October the same year, for 2 shillings, with costs of 6 shillings, 8 pence.
Other cases are recorded elsewhere, as at the Giltspur Street Compter, where in 1805 Mr. Neild found a man named William Grant
detained for 1 shilling 9 pence, with costs of 5 shillings.
and John Lancaster for 1 shilling, 8 pence, with costs of 7 shillings, 6 pence. Quote.
These surely, I thought," says Mr. Neild, "were bad enough! But it was not so. End quote.
He recites another most outrageous and extraordinary case, in which one John Bird,
a market porter, was arrested and committed at the suit of a publican
for the paltry sum of 4 pence, with costs of 7 shillings, 6 pence.
Bird was, however, discharged within three days by a subscription raised among his fellow-prisoners.
Mr. Buxton, in his "Inquiry into the System of Prison Discipline,"
quotes a case which came within his own knowledge of a boy sent to prison for non-payment of one penny.
The lad in question was found in Coldbath Fields prison, to which he had been sent for a month in default of paying a fine of forty shillings.
He had been in the employ of a corn-chandler at Islington, and went into London with his master's cart and horse.
There was in the City Road a temporary bar, with a collector of tolls who was sometimes on the spot and sometimes not.
The boy declared he saw no one, and accordingly passed through without paying the toll of a penny.
For this he was summoned before a magistrate, and sentenced as already stated.
The lad was proved to be of good character and the son of respectable parents.
Mr. Buxton's friends at once paid the forty shillings, and the boy was released.
The costs in heavier debts always doubled the sum; if the arrest was made in the country it trebled it.
Neild gives a list of the various items charged upon a debt of £10, which included instructions to sue,
affidavit of debt, drawing praecipe (1 pound, 5 shillings), capias, fee to officer on arrest,
affidavit of service, and many more, amounting in all to twenty-seven,
and costing 11 pounds, 15 shillings, 8 pence, within ten days.
Before dealing with the debtors in Newgate, I may refer incidentally
to those in other London prisons, for Newgate was not the only place of durance for these unfortunate people. There were also the King's Bench,
the Fleet, and the Marshalsea prisons especially devoted to them,
whilst Ludgate, the Giltspur Street, and Borough Compters also received them
the latter two being also a prison for felons and vagrants arrested within certain limits.
The King's Bench was a national prison, in which were confined all debtors arrested for debt or for contempt of the court of the King's Bench.
The population generally amounted to from five hundred to seven hundred, the accommodation being calculated for two hundred.
Every new-comer was entitled to a "chummage" ticket, but did not always get it,
being often obliged to pay a high rent for a bed at the coffee-house or in some room which was vacated by its regular occupant.
No fixed rates or rules governed the hiring out of rooms or parts of a room, and all sorts of imposition was practiced.
The best, or at least the most influential prisoners, got lodging in the State House, which contained "eight large handsome rooms."
Besides those actually resident within the walls,
another two hundred more or less took advantage of "the rules," and lived outside within a circumference of two miles and a half.
In these cases security was given for the amount of the debt,
and a heavy fee at the rate of £8 per £100, with £4 for every additional hundred.
Besides these, a number had the privilege of a "run on the key," which allowed a prisoner to go into the rules for the day.
The foregoing rentals and payments for privileges, together with fees exacted on commitment and discharge, went to the marshal or keeper of the prison,
whose net annual income thus entirely derived from the impecunious amounted to between three and four thousand pounds.
The office of marshal had been hereditary,
but in the 27th George II the right of presentation was bought by the Crown for £10,500.
The marshal was supposed to be resident either within the prison or the rules.
He seems to have felt no responsibility as to the welfare or comfort of those in charge, and out of whom he made all his money.
The prison was always in "the most filthy state imaginable."
The half or wholly starved prisoners fished for alms or food at the gratings.
When they were sick no more notice was taken of them than of a dog.
A man dying of liver complaint lay on the cold stones without a bed or food to eat.
Dissolute habits prevailed on all sides; drunkenness was universal, gambling perpetual.
The yards were taken up with rackets and five courts, and here and there were "bumble puppy grounds," a game in which the players rolled iron balls
into holes marked with numbers.
How to make most profit out of the wretched denizens of the jail was the marshal's only care. He got a rent for the coffee-house and the bake-house;
the keeper of the large tap-room called the Brace, because it was once kept by two brothers named Partridge, also paid him toll.
The sale of spirits was forbidden, but gin could always be had at the whistling shops, where it was known as Moonshine, Sky Blue,
Mexico, and was consumed at the rate of a hogshead per week.
The Fleet, which stood in Farringdon Street,
was a prison for debtors and persons committed for contempt by the courts of Chancery, Exchequer, and Common Pleas.
It was so used for the date of the abolition of the Star Chamber in the 16th Charles I.
The shameful malpractices of Bambridge,
the warden of the Fleet at the commencement of the eighteenth century, are too well known to need more than a passing reference.
A committee of the House of Commons investigated the charges against Bambridge, who was proved to have connived at the escape of some debtors,
and to have been guilty of extortion to others. One Sir William Rich, Bart., he had loaded with heavy irons
In consequence of these disclosures, both Bambridge and Huggin, his predecessor in the office, were committed to Newgate,
and many reforms instituted. But the condition of the prison and its inmates remained unsatisfactory to the last.
It contained generally from six to seven hundred inmates, while another hundred more or less resided in the rules outside.
The principle of "chummage" prevailed as in the King's Bench,
but a number of rooms, fifteen more or less, were reserved for poor debtors under the name of Bartholomew Fair.
The rentals of rooms and fees went to the warden, whose income was £2372.
The same evils of overcrowding, uncleanliness, want of medical attendance,
absence or neglect of divine service, were present as in the King's Bench, but in an exaggerated form.
The Committee on Jails reported that, quote, although the house of the warden looked into the court,
and the turnkeys slept in the prison, yet scenes of riot, drunkenness, and disorder were most prevalent, end quote.
The state of morals was disgraceful. Any woman obtained admission if sober, and if she got drunk she was not turned out.
There was no distinct place for the female debtors, who lived in the same galleries as the men.
Disturbances were frequent, owing to the riotous conduct of intoxicated women.
Twice a week there was a wine and beer club held at night, which lasted till two or three in the morning.
In the yard behind the prison
were places set apart for skittles, fives, and tennis, which strangers frequented as any other place of public amusement.
Matters were rather better at the Marshalsea.
This very ancient prison, which stood in the High Street, Southwark,
was used for debtors arrested for the lowest sums within twelve miles of the palace of Whitehall;
also for prisoners committed by the Admiralty Court.
At one time the Marshalsea was the receptacle of pirates, but none were committed to it after 1789.
The court of the Marshalsea was instituted by Charles I. in the sixth year of his reign,
to be held before the steward of the royal household, the knight marshal, and the steward of the court,
with jurisdiction to hold pleas in all actions within the prescribed limits. The court was chiefly used for the recovery of small debts under £10
but its business was much reduced by the extension of the Courts of Conscience.
The prison was a nest of abuses, like its neighbor the King's Bench
and came under the strong animadversion of the Jail Committee of 1729.
As the business of the Marshalsea Court declined, the numbers in its prison diminished.
The population, as reported by the committee in 1814, averaged about sixty,
and the prison, although wives and children resided within the walls, was not overcrowded.
Their conduct too was orderly on the whole.
Drunkenness was not common, chiefly because liquor was not to be had freely, although the tapster paid a rent of two guineas a week for permission to sell it.
The inmates, who euphemistically styled themselves "collegians,"
were governed by rules which they themselves had framed, and under which subscriptions were levied
and fines imposed for conduct disapproved of by the "college."
A court of the collegians was held every Monday to manage its affairs, at which all prisoners were required to attend.
A committee of collegians was elected to act as the executive, also a secretary or accountant to receive monies and keep books,
and a master of the ale-room, who kept this the scene of their revels clean, and saw that boiling water was provided for grog.
Bad language, quarreling, throwing water over one another was forbidden on pain of fine and being sent to Coventry;
but the prevailing moral tone may be guessed from the penalty inflicted upon persons singing obscene songs before nine p.m.
Yet the public opinion of the whole body seems to have checked dissipation.
The poorer prisoners were not in abject want, as in other prisons,
owing to many charitable gifts and bequests, which included annual donations from the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Lord Steward of the Household, the steward and officers of the Marshalsea Court, and others.
Legacies had also been left to free a certain number of debtors, notably that of £100 per annum
left by a Mr. Henry Allnutt, who was long a prisoner in the Marshalsea, and came into a fortune while there.
His bequest, which was charged upon his manor at Goring, Oxon, and hence called the Oxford Charity,
was applied only to the release of poor debtors whom £4 each could free.
The supreme control of the Marshalsea was vested in the marshal of the royal household; but although he drew a salary of £500 a year,
he did nothing beyond visiting the prison occasionally, and left the administration to the deputy marshal.
The latter's salary, with fees, the rent of the tap and of the chandler's shop, amounted to about £600 a year.
The compters of Ludgate, Giltspur Street, and the Borough were discontinued as debtors' prisons (as was Newgate also)
on the opening of Whitecross prison for debtors in 1815.
Ludgate to the last was the debtors' prison for freemen of the city of London,
clergymen, proctors, attorneys, and persons specially selected by the Corporation.
At one time the Ludgate debtors, accompanied by the keeper,
went outside and beyond the prison to call on their creditors, and try to arrange their debts, but this practice was discontinued.
There were fifteen rooms of various sizes, and as the numbers imprisoned rarely exceeded five-and-twenty, the place was never overcrowded,
while the funds of several bequests and charities were applied in adding to the material comfort of the prisoners.
The Giltspur Street Compter received sheriffs' debtors, also felons, vagrants, and night charges.
It was generally crowded, as debtors who would have gone to the Poultry Compter were sent to Giltspur Street when the former was condemned as unfit to receive prisoners.
The demands for fees were excessive in Giltspur Street.
Those who could not pay were thrown into the wards with the night charges,
and denied admission to the "charity wards," which partook of all the benefits of bequests and donations to poor debtors.
The Borough Compter was in a disgraceful state to the last. The men's ward had an earth, or rather a mud, floor,
and was so unfit to sleep on that it had not been used for many years, so that the men and women associated together indiscriminately.
The rooms had no fireplaces, so it mattered little that no coals were allowed.
There were no beds or bedding, no straw even.
In one room Mr. Neild found a woman ill of a flux shut up with three men;
the latter raised eighteen pence among them to pay for a truss of straw for the poor woman to lie on.
Neild found the prisoners in the Borough Compter ragged, starving, and dirty.
I come now to the debtors in Newgate. The quarters they occupied were divided, as I have said, into three principal divisions
the master's side, the cabin side, and the common side. Payment of a fee of 3 shillings gained the debtor admission to the two first named;
those who could pay nothing went, as a matter of course, to the common side;
a further fee was, however, demanded from the new-comer before he was made free of either the master's or the cabin side.
This was the reprehensible claim for "garnish," which had already been abolished in all well-conducted prisons, but which still was demanded in Newgate.
Garnish on the cabin side was a guinea at entrance for coals, candles, brooms, etc., and a gallon of beer on discharge;
on the master's side it was thirteen and fourpence, and a gallon of beer on entrance, although Mr. Newman,

and a person calling herself Miss Slack duly attended at the bank, where the money was handed over to her in proper form.
A second will, also forged, was propounded at Doctors Commons as that of a Mrs. Hunt of Bristol.
Mrs. Hunt had left money in the funds which remained unclaimed, and had been transferred, as in Miss Slack's case.
Here again the money, with ten years' interest, was handed over to Barber and another calling himself Thomas Hunt, an executor of the will.
It was shown that the will must be a forgery,
as its signature was dated 1829, whereas Mrs. Hunt actually died in 1806.
A third similar fraud to the amount of £2000 was also brought to light.
Fletcher was the moving spirit of the whole business. It was he who had introduced Barber to Miss Slack,
and held all the threads of these intricate and nefarious transactions.
Barber and Fletcher were both transported for life, although Fletcher declared that Barber was innocent, and had no guilty knowledge of what was being done.
Barber was subsequently pardoned, but was not replaced on the rolls as an attorney till 1855,
when Lord Campbell delivered judgment on Barber's petition, to the effect that
the evidence to establish his (Barber's) connivance in the frauds was too doubtful for us to continue his exclusion any longer.
Banks and bankers continued to be victimized.
In 1844
the Bank of England was defrauded of a sum of £8000 by one of its clerks, Burgess, in conjunction with an accomplice named Elder.
Burgess fraudulently transferred consols to the above amount, standing in the name of Mr. Oxenford, to another party.
A person, Elder of course, who personated Oxenford, attended at the bank to complete the transfer and sell the stock.
Burgess, who was purposely on leave from the bank, effected the sale, which was paid for with a cheque for nearly the whole amount on Lubbock's Bank.
Burgess and Elder proceeded in company to cash this, but as they wanted all gold,
the cashier gave them eight Bank of England notes for £1000 each, saying that they could get so much specie nowhere else.
Thither Elder went alone, provided with a number of canvas and one large carpet-bag.
But when the latter was filled with gold it was too heavy to lift,
and Elder had to be assisted by two bank porters, who carried it for him to a carriage waiting near the Mansion House.
The thieves, for Elder was soon joined by Burgess, drove together to Ben Caunt's, the pugilist's, public-house in St. Martin's Lane,
where the cash was transferred from the carpet-bag to a portmanteau.
The same evening both started for Liverpool, and embarking on board the mail steamer 'Britannia,' escaped to the United States.
Burgess' continued absence was soon noticed at the bank.
Suspicions were aroused when it was found that he had been employed in selling stock for Mr. Oxenford, which developed into certainty
as soon as that gentleman was referred to.
Mr. Oxenford having denied that he had made any transfer of stock, the matter was at once put into the hands of the police.
A smart detective, Forrester, after a little inquiry,
established the fact that the man who had personated Mr. Oxenford was a horse-dealer named Joseph Elder, an intimate acquaintance of Burgess'.
Forrester next traced the fugitives to Liverpool,
and thence to Halifax, whither he followed them, accompanied by a confidential clerk from the bank.
At Halifax Forrester learnt that the men he wanted had gone on to Boston, thence to Buffalo and Canada, and back to Boston.
He found them at length residing at the latter place, one as a landed proprietor, the other as a publican.
Elder, the former, was soon apprehended at his house, but he evaded the law by hanging himself with his pocket-handkerchief.
The inn belonging to Burgess was surrounded
but he escaped through a back door on to the river, and rowed off in a boat to a hiding-place in the woods.
Next day a person betrayed him for the reward, and he was soon captured.
The proceeds of the robbery were lodged in a Boston bank,
but four hundred sovereigns were found on Elder, while two hundred more were found in Burgess' effects.
Burgess was eventually brought back to England, tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to transportation for life.
Within a month or two the bank of Messrs. Rogers and Co., Clement's Lane, was broken into.
Robberies as daring in conception as they were boldly executed were common enough.
One night a quantity of plate was stolen from Windsor Castle; another time Buckingham Palace was robbed.
Of this class was the ingenious yet peculiarly simple robbery effected at the house of Lord Fitzgerald in Belgrave Square.
The butler, on the occasion of a death in the family, when the house was in some confusion, arranged with a burglar to come in,
and with another carry off the plate-chest in broad daylight, and as a matter of business. No one interfered or asked any questions.
The thief walked into the house in Belgrave Square, and openly carried off the plate-chest, deposited it in a light cart at the door, and drove away.
Howse, the steward, accused the other servants, but they retorted, declaring that he had been visited by the thief the day previous,
whom he had shown over the plate closet.
Howse and his accomplice were arrested; the former was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years, but the latter was acquitted.
Stealing plate was about this period the crime of a more aristocratic thief.
The club spoons and other articles of plate were long a source of profitable income to a gentleman named Ashley,
who belonged to five good London clubs --
the Junior United Service, the Union, Reform, Colonial, and Erechtheum clubs.
When one of these clubs was taken in at the Army and Navy, that establishment also suffered.
Suspicion fell at length upon Ashley, who was seen to handle the forks and spoons at table in a strange manner.
A watch was set on his house, in Allington Street, Pimlico,
and one day a police constable tracked him to a silversmith's in Holborn Hill,
where Ashley produced four silver spoons, and begged that his initials might be engraved upon them.
Ashley was arrested as he left the shop; the spoons were impounded, and it was found that the club monogram had been erased from them.
On a search of the prisoner's lodgings in Allington Street, a silver fork was found,
a number of pawnbrokers' duplicates, and three small files. It was proved at the trial that Ashley had asked his landlady for brick-dust and leather,
and it was contended that these with the files were used to alter the marks on the plate.
At most of the clubs the servants had been mulcted to make good lost plate, which had no doubt been stolen by the prisoner.
Several pawnbrokers were subpoenaed and obliged to surrender plate, to the extent in some cases of a couple of dozen of spoons or forks,
which the various club secretaries identified as the property of their respective clubs.
Ashley was the son of an army agent and banker,
and many witnesses were brought to attest to his previous good character, but he was found guilty and sentenced to seven years' transportation.
A robbery of a somewhat novel kind was executed in rather a bungling fashion by Ker, a sea-captain,
whose ship brought home a mixed cargo from Bahia and other ports.
Part of the freight were four hundred rough diamonds valued at £4000.
These packages were consigned to Messrs. Shroeder of London; and as it was known that they were to arrive in Ker's ship,
one of the owners had met her at Deal, but the captain had already absconded with the packages of precious stones in his pocket.
Ker came at once to London, and, by the help of the landlord of a public-house in Smithfield and others, disposed of the whole of the diamonds.
A Jew named Benjamin effected the sale to certain merchants named Blogg and Martin,
who declared that the rough diamond market was in such a depressed condition that they could only afford to give £1750 for stones worth
four thousand pounds
The circumstances of this purchase of brilliants from a stranger at such an inadequate price was strongly commented upon at Ker's trial.
The moment it was discovered that the diamonds had disappeared, the affair was taken up by the police.
Forrester, the detective who had pursued and captured Burgess at Boston, tracked Ker to France, and following him there, eventually captured him
at Montreuil. He was arraigned at the Old Bailey, and the case fully proved. His sentence was seven years' transportation.
The gravest crimes continued at intervals to inspire the town with horror, and concentrate public attention upon the jail of Newgate,
and the murderers immured within its walls.
Courvoisier's case made a great stir. There was unusual atrocity in this murder of an aged, infirm gentleman,
a scion of the ducal house of Bedford, by his confidential valet and personal attendant.
Lord William Russell lived alone in Norfolk Street, Park Lane. He was a widower, and seventy-three years of age.
One morning in May his lordship was found dead in his bed with his throat cut.
The fact of the murder was first discovered by the housemaid,
who, on going down early, was surprised to find the dining-room in a state of utter confusion;
the furniture turned upside down, the drawers of the escritoire open and rifled,
a bundle lying on the floor, as though thieves had been interrupted in the act.
The housemaid summoned the cook, and both went to call the valet, Courvoisier,
who came from his room ready dressed, a suspicious circumstance, as he was always late in the morning.
The housemaid suggested that they should see if his lordship was all right, and the three went to his bedroom.
While Courvoisier opened the shutters, the housemaid, approaching the bed, saw that the pillow was saturated with blood.
The discovery of the murdered man immediately followed. The neighborhood was alarmed, the police sent for, and a close inquiry forthwith commenced.
That Lord William Russell had committed suicide was at once declared impossible.
It was also clearly proved that no forcible entry had been made into the house;
the fresh marks of violence upon the door had evidently been made inside, and not from outside;
moreover, the instruments, poker and chisel, by which they had no doubt been effected,
were found in the butler's pantry, used by Courvoisier.
The researches of the police soon laid bare other suspicious facts.
The bundle found in the dining-room contained, with clothes, various small articles of plate and jewelery which a thief would probably have put into his pocket.
Upstairs in the bedroom a rouleaux box for sovereigns had been broken open,
also the jewel-box and note-case, from the latter of which was abstracted a ten-pound note known to have been in the possession of the deceased.
His lordship's watch was gone.
Further suspicion was caused by the position of a book and a wax candle by the bedside.
The latter was so placed that it could throw no light on the former, which was a 'Life of Sir Samuel Romilly.'
The intention of the real murderer to shift the crime to burglars was evident although futile,
and the police, feeling convinced that the crime had been committed by some inmate of the house,
took Courvoisier into custody, and placed the two female servants under surveillance.
The valet's strange demeanor had attracted attention from the first.
He had hung over the body in a state of dreadful agitation, answering no questions, and taking no part in the proceedings.
Three days later a close search of the butler's pantry produced fresh circumstantial evidence.
Behind the skirting board several of his lordship's rings were discovered;
near it was his Waterloo medal, and the above-mentioned ten-pound note.
Further investigation was rewarded by the discovery in the pantry of a split gold ring, used by Lord William to carry his keys on;
next, and in the same place, a chased gold key;
and at last his lordship's watch was found secreted under the leads of the sink.
All this was evidence sufficient to warrant Courvoisier's committal for trial;
but still he found friends, and a liberal subscription was raised among the foreign servants in London to provide funds for his defense.
Courvoisier, when put on his trial, pleaded not guilty;
but on the second day the discovery of fresh evidence, more particularly the recovery of some of Lord William's stolen plate,
induced the prisoner to make a full confession of his crime to the lawyers who defended him.
This placed them in a position of much embarrassment. To have thrown up their brief would have been to have secured Courvoisier's conviction.
Mr. Phillips, who led in the case, went to the other extreme,
and in an impassioned address implored the jury not to send an innocent man to the gallows.
It will be remembered that the question whether Mr. Phillips had not exceeded the limits usually allowed to counsel was much debated at the time.
The jury without hesitation found Courvoisier guilty, and he was sentenced to death.
The prisoner's demeanor had greatly changed during the trial.
Coolness amounting almost to effrontery gave way to hopeless dejection.
On his removal to Newgate after sentence,
he admitted that he had been justly convicted, and expressed great anxiety that his fellow-servants should be relieved from all suspicion.
Later in the day he tried to commit suicide by cramming a towel down his throat, but was prevented.
Next morning he made a full confession in presence of his attorney, and the governor, Mr. Cope.
In this he gave as the motives of his crime a quarrel he had with his master, who threatened to discharge him without a character.
Lord William, according to the valet, was of a peevish, difficult temper;
he was annoyed with his man for various small omissions and acts of forgetfulness, and on the night of the murder had taken Courvoisier to task rather sharply.
Finally, on coming downstairs after bed-time, Lord William had found Courvoisier in the dining-room.
What are you doing here?" asked his lordship.|"What are you doing here?" asked his lordship. LJ013-0212|"You can have no good intentions; you must quit my service tomorrow morning.
This seems to have decided Courvoisier,
who took a carving-knife from the sideboard in the dining-room, went upstairs to Lord William's bedroom, and drew the knife across his throat.
He appeared to die instantly," said the murderer, in conclusion.|"He appeared to die instantly," said the murderer, in conclusion. LJ013-0216|His account of his acts and movements after the deed|His account of his acts and movements after the deed LJ013-0217|varied so considerably in the several documents he left behind, that too much reliance cannot be placed upon his confession.|varied so considerably in the several documents he left behind, that too much reliance cannot be placed upon his confession. LJ013-0218|His last statement contains the words, "The public now think I am a liar, and they will not believe me when I say the truth.
This was no doubt the case, but this much truth his confession may be taken to contain:
that Courvoisier was idle, discontented, ready to take offense, greedy of gain;
that he could not resist the opportunity for robbery offered him by his situation at Lord William Russell's; that when vexed with his master
he did not shrink from murder, both for revenge and to conceal his other crimes.
Courvoisier wished to commit suicide in Newgate, but was prevented by the vigilant supervision to which he was subjected while in jail.
The attempt was to have been made by opening a vein and allowing himself to bleed to death.
The Sunday night before his execution he would not go to bed when ordered.
The governor insisted, but Courvoisier showed great reluctance to strip.
The order was, however, at length obeyed, and the whole of the prisoner's clothes were minutely searched.
In the pocket of the coat Mr. Cope, the governor, found a neatly-folded cloth, and asked what it was for.
Courvoisier admitted that he had intended to bind it tightly round his arm and bleed himself to death in the night.
The next inquiry was how he hoped to open a vein. "With a bit of sharpened stick picked out of the ordinary firewood."
Where is it?" asked the governor.|"Where is it?" asked the governor. LJ013-0232|The prisoner replied that he had left it in the mattress of which he had just been deprived.|The prisoner replied that he had left it in the mattress of which he had just been deprived. LJ013-0233|The bed was searched, but no piece of sharpened wood was found. It was thought that it might have been lost in changing the mattresses.|The bed was searched, but no piece of sharpened wood was found. It was thought that it might have been lost in changing the mattresses. LJ013-0234|The cloth above referred to belonged to the inner seam of his trousers, which he had managed to tear out.|The cloth above referred to belonged to the inner seam of his trousers, which he had managed to tear out. LJ013-0235|There is nothing to show that Courvoisier really contemplated self-destruction.|There is nothing to show that Courvoisier really contemplated self-destruction. LJ013-0236|A murder which reproduced many of the features of that committed by Greenacre soon followed, and excited the public mind even more than that of Courvoisier's.|A murder which reproduced many of the features of that committed by Greenacre soon followed, and excited the public mind even more than that of Courvoisier's. LJ013-0237|Daniel Good's crime might have remained long undiscovered but for his own careless stupidity.|Daniel Good's crime might have remained long undiscovered but for his own careless stupidity. LJ013-0238|He was coachman to a gentleman at Roehampton. One day he went into a pawnbroker's at Wandsworth, and bought a pair of breeches on credit.|He was coachman to a gentleman at Roehampton. One day he went into a pawnbroker's at Wandsworth, and bought a pair of breeches on credit. LJ013-0239|At the same time he was seen to steal and secrete a pair of trousers. The shop-boy gave information.|At the same time he was seen to steal and secrete a pair of trousers. The shop-boy gave information. LJ013-0240|Good was followed to his stables by a policeman, but obstinately denied the theft.|Good was followed to his stables by a policeman, but obstinately denied the theft. LJ013-0241|The policeman insisted on searching the premises, at which Good displayed some uneasiness.|The policeman insisted on searching the premises, at which Good displayed some uneasiness. LJ013-0242|This increased when the officer, accompanied by two others, a neighbor and a bailiff, entered one of the stables.|This increased when the officer, accompanied by two others, a neighbor and a bailiff, entered one of the stables. LJ013-0243|Good now offered to go to Wandsworth and satisfy the pawnbroker.|Good now offered to go to Wandsworth and satisfy the pawnbroker. LJ013-0244|Just at this moment, however, the searchers found concealed under two trusses of hay a woman's headless and dismembered trunk.|Just at this moment, however, the searchers found concealed under two trusses of hay a woman's headless and dismembered trunk. LJ013-0245|At the constable's cry of alarm Good rushed from the stable and locked the door behind him.|At the constable's cry of alarm Good rushed from the stable and locked the door behind him. LJ013-0246|Some time elapsed before the imprisoned party could force open the doors, and by then the fugitive had escaped.|Some time elapsed before the imprisoned party could force open the doors, and by then the fugitive had escaped. LJ013-0247|Medical assistance having been summoned, it was ascertained how the dismemberment had been effected.|Medical assistance having been summoned, it was ascertained how the dismemberment had been effected. LJ013-0248|At the same time an overpowering odor attracted them to the adjoining harness-room, where the missing remains were raked out|At the same time an overpowering odor attracted them to the adjoining harness-room, where the missing remains were raked out LJ013-0249|half consumed in the ashes of a wood fire.|half consumed in the ashes of a wood fire. LJ013-0250|In the same room a large axe and saw were found covered with blood.|In the same room a large axe and saw were found covered with blood. LJ013-0251|Inquiry into the character of Good exposed him as a loose liver, who "kept company" with several women.|Inquiry into the character of Good exposed him as a loose liver, who "kept company" with several women. LJ013-0252|One called his sister, but supposed to be his wife, had occupied a room in South Street, Manchester Square,|One called his sister, but supposed to be his wife, had occupied a room in South Street, Manchester Square, LJ013-0253|with a son of Good's by a former wife. Another wife, real or fictitious, existed in Spitalfields,|with a son of Good's by a former wife. Another wife, real or fictitious, existed in Spitalfields, LJ013-0254|and evidence was given of close relation between Good and a third woman, a girl named Butcher, residing at Woolwich.|and evidence was given of close relation between Good and a third woman, a girl named Butcher, residing at Woolwich. LJ013-0255|The victim was the first of these three.|The victim was the first of these three. LJ013-0256|Good had told her, much to her perturbation, that she was to move from South Street to Roehampton, and one day he fetched her.|Good had told her, much to her perturbation, that she was to move from South Street to Roehampton, and one day he fetched her. LJ013-0257|They were seen together on Barnes Common, and again in Putney Park Lane, where they were talking loud and angrily.|They were seen together on Barnes Common, and again in Putney Park Lane, where they were talking loud and angrily. LJ013-0258|The poor creature was never seen again alive.|The poor creature was never seen again alive. LJ013-0259|The actual method of the murder was never exactly ascertained.|The actual method of the murder was never exactly ascertained. LJ013-0260|Good himself remained at large for some weeks. He had tramped as far as Tunbridge, where he obtained work as a bricklayer's laborer;|Good himself remained at large for some weeks. He had tramped as far as Tunbridge, where he obtained work as a bricklayer's laborer; LJ013-0261|he there gave satisfaction for industry, but he was taciturn, and would hold no converse with his fellows.|he there gave satisfaction for industry, but he was taciturn, and would hold no converse with his fellows. LJ013-0262|The woman where he lodged noticed that he was very restless at night, moaning and sighing much. Detection came unexpectedly.|The woman where he lodged noticed that he was very restless at night, moaning and sighing much. Detection came unexpectedly. LJ013-0263|He was recognized by an ex-policeman who had known him at Roehampton, and immediately arrested.|He was recognized by an ex-policeman who had known him at Roehampton, and immediately arrested. LJ013-0264|In his effects were found the clothes he had on at the time of his escape from the stables, and under the jacket he was wearing|In his effects were found the clothes he had on at the time of his escape from the stables, and under the jacket he was wearing LJ013-0265|was a piece of a woman's calico apron stained with blood, which he had used to save the pressure on his shoulder by the hod.|was a piece of a woman's calico apron stained with blood, which he had used to save the pressure on his shoulder by the hod. LJ013-0266|Good was committed to Newgate, and tried at the Central Criminal Court before a crowded court.|Good was committed to Newgate, and tried at the Central Criminal Court before a crowded court. LJ013-0267|He made a rambling defense, ending by saying,|He made a rambling defense, ending by saying, LJ013-0268|Good ladies and gentlemen all, I have a great deal more to say, but I am so bad I cannot say it.|Good ladies and gentlemen all, I have a great deal more to say, but I am so bad I cannot say it. LJ014-0001|The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 17: Newgate notorieties continued, part 2.|The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume two. By Arthur Griffiths. Section seventeen: Newgate notorieties continued, part two. LJ014-0002|Hocker's murder is in its way interesting, as affording another proof of the extraordinary way in which the culprit returned to the scene of his guilt.|Hocker's murder is in its way interesting, as affording another proof of the extraordinary way in which the culprit returned to the scene of his guilt. LJ014-0003|The cries of his victim, a Mr. Delarue,|The cries of his victim, a Mr. Delarue, LJ014-0004|brought passers-by and policemen to the spot, a lonely place near a dead wall beyond Belsize Hall, Hampstead,|brought passers-by and policemen to the spot, a lonely place near a dead wall beyond Belsize Hall, Hampstead, LJ014-0005|but too late to give substantial aid.|but too late to give substantial aid. LJ014-0006|While the body lay there still warm, battered and bleeding from the cruel blows inflicted upon him by his cowardly assailant, a man came by singing.|While the body lay there still warm, battered and bleeding from the cruel blows inflicted upon him by his cowardly assailant, a man came by singing. LJ014-0007|He entered into conversation with the policemen, and learnt, as it seemed for the first time, what had happened.|He entered into conversation with the policemen, and learnt, as it seemed for the first time, what had happened. LJ014-0008|His remark was, "It is a nasty job;" he took hold of the dead hand, and confessed that he felt "queer" at the shocking sight.|His remark was, "It is a nasty job;" he took hold of the dead hand, and confessed that he felt "queer" at the shocking sight. LJ014-0009|This sight was his own handiwork,|This sight was his own handiwork, LJ014-0010|yet he could not overcome the strange fascination it had for him, and remained by the side of the corpse till the stretcher came.|yet he could not overcome the strange fascination it had for him, and remained by the side of the corpse till the stretcher came. LJ014-0011|Even then he followed it as far as Belsize Lane.|Even then he followed it as far as Belsize Lane. LJ014-0012|It was here that the others engaged in their dismal office in removing the dead first got a good look at the stranger's face.|It was here that the others engaged in their dismal office in removing the dead first got a good look at the stranger's face. LJ014-0013|He wanted a light for a cigar, and got it from a lantern which was lifted up and fully betrayed his features.|He wanted a light for a cigar, and got it from a lantern which was lifted up and fully betrayed his features. LJ014-0014|It was noticed that he wore a mackintosh. Next day the police, in making a careful search of the scene of the murder,|It was noticed that he wore a mackintosh. Next day the police, in making a careful search of the scene of the murder, LJ014-0015|picked up a coat-button, which afterwards played an important part in the identification of the murderer.|picked up a coat-button, which afterwards played an important part in the identification of the murderer. LJ014-0016|A letter, which afforded an additional clue, was also found in the pocket of the deceased. Still it was many weeks before any arrest was made.|A letter, which afforded an additional clue, was also found in the pocket of the deceased. Still it was many weeks before any arrest was made. LJ014-0017|In the mean time the police were not idle.|In the mean time the police were not idle. LJ014-0018|It came out by degrees that the person who had been seen in Belsize Lane on the night the body was found was a friend of the deceased.|It came out by degrees that the person who had been seen in Belsize Lane on the night the body was found was a friend of the deceased. LJ014-0019|His name was Hocker; he was by trade a ladies' shoemaker; and it was also ascertained that after the day of the murder he was flush of money.|His name was Hocker; he was by trade a ladies' shoemaker; and it was also ascertained that after the day of the murder he was flush of money. LJ014-0020|He was soon afterwards arrested on suspicion, and a search of his lodgings brought to light several garments saturated with blood;|He was soon afterwards arrested on suspicion, and a search of his lodgings brought to light several garments saturated with blood; LJ014-0021|a coat among them much torn and stained, with three buttons missing, one of which corresponded with that picked up at Hampstead.|a coat among them much torn and stained, with three buttons missing, one of which corresponded with that picked up at Hampstead. LJ014-0022|The letter found in the pocket of the deceased was sealed with a wafer marked F,|The letter found in the pocket of the deceased was sealed with a wafer marked F, LJ014-0023|and many of the same sort were found in the possession of the accused. This was enough to obtain a committal,|and many of the same sort were found in the possession of the accused. This was enough to obtain a committal, LJ014-0024|after several remands; but the case contained elements of doubt, and the evidence at the trial was entirely circumstantial.|after several remands; but the case contained elements of doubt, and the evidence at the trial was entirely circumstantial. LJ014-0025|A witness deposed to meeting Hocker, soon after the cries of murder were heard,|A witness deposed to meeting Hocker, soon after the cries of murder were heard, LJ014-0026|running at a dog-trot into London, and others swore that they plainly recognized him as the man seen soon afterwards in the lane.|running at a dog-trot into London, and others swore that they plainly recognized him as the man seen soon afterwards in the lane. LJ014-0027|A woman whom he called on the same evening declared he had worn a mackintosh, his coat was much torn, there was a stain of blood on his shirt-cuff,|A woman whom he called on the same evening declared he had worn a mackintosh, his coat was much torn, there was a stain of blood on his shirt-cuff, LJ014-0028|and he was in possession, the first time to her knowledge, of a watch.|and he was in possession, the first time to her knowledge, of a watch. LJ014-0029|This was Delarue's watch, fully identified as such, which Hocker told his brother Delarue had given him the morning of the murder.|This was Delarue's watch, fully identified as such, which Hocker told his brother Delarue had given him the morning of the murder. LJ014-0030|These were damnatory facts which well supported the prosecution.|These were damnatory facts which well supported the prosecution. LJ014-0031|The prisoner made an elaborate defense, in which he sought to vilify the character of deceased|The prisoner made an elaborate defense, in which he sought to vilify the character of deceased LJ014-0032|as the seducer of an innocent girl to whom he (Hocker) had been fondly attached.|as the seducer of an innocent girl to whom he (Hocker) had been fondly attached. LJ014-0033|When her ruin was discovered her brother panted for revenge.|When her ruin was discovered her brother panted for revenge. LJ014-0034|Hocker, whose skill in counterfeiting handwriting was known, was asked to fabricate a letter making an assignation with Delarue|Hocker, whose skill in counterfeiting handwriting was known, was asked to fabricate a letter making an assignation with Delarue LJ014-0035|in a lonely part of Hampstead.|in a lonely part of Hampstead. LJ014-0036|Hocker and the brother went to the spot, where the latter left him to meet his sister's seducer alone.|Hocker and the brother went to the spot, where the latter left him to meet his sister's seducer alone. LJ014-0037|Soon afterwards Hocker heard cries of "murder,
and proceeding to where they came from, found Delarue dead, slain by the furious brother.
Hocker was so overcome, feeling himself the principal cause of the tragedy,
that he rushed to a slaughterhouse in Hampstead and purposely stained his clothes with blood.
Such an extravagant defense did not weigh with judge or jury;
the first summed up dead against the prisoner, and the latter, after retiring for ten minutes, found him guilty.
Hocker's conduct in Newgate while under sentence of death was most extraordinary.
He drew up several long statements, containing narratives purely fictitious, imputing crimes to his victim, and repeating his line of defense
that Delarue had suffered by the hands of imaginary outraged brothers acting as the avengers of females deeply injured by him.
Hocker made several pretended confessions and revelations, all of which were proved to be absolutely false by the police on inquiry.
His demeanor was a strange compound of wickedness, falsehood, and deceit.
But at the fatal hour his hardihood forsook him, and he was almost insensible when taken out of his cell for execution.
Restoratives were applied, but he was in a fainting condition when tied, and had to be supported by the assistant executioner
while Calcraft adjusted the noose.
There was an epidemic of murder in the United Kingdom about 1848 to 9.
In November of the first-named year occurred the wholesale slaughter of the Jermys in their house, Stanfield Hall, by the miscreant Rush.
Soon afterwards, in Gloucestershire,
a maidservant, Sarah Thomas, murdered her mistress, an aged woman, by beating out her brains with a stone.
Next year John Gleeson Wilson, at Liverpool, murdered a woman, Ann Henrichson, also a maidservant and two children;
while in Ireland a wife dashed out her husband's brains with a hammer.
London did not escape the contagion, and prominent among the detestable crimes of the period stands that of the Mannings at Bermondsey.
These great criminals suffered at Horsemonger Lane Jail, but they were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and were for some time inmates of Newgate.
Their victim was a man named Patrick O'Connor, a Custom-House gauger, who had been a suitor of Marie de Roux before she became Mrs. Manning.
Marie de Roux up to the time of her marriage had been in service as lady's maid to Lady Blantyre, daughter of the Duchess of Sutherland,
and Manning hoped to get some small Government appointment through his wife's interest.
He had failed in this as well as in the business of a publican, which he had at one time adopted.
After the marriage a close intimacy was still maintained between O'Connor and the Mannings.
He lived at Mile End, whence he walked often to call at 3, Minver Place, Bermondsey, the residence of his old love.
O'Connor was a man of substance. He had long followed the profitable trade of a money-lender,
and by dint of usurious interest on small sums advanced to needy neighbors, had amassed as much as eight thousand pounds or ten thousand pounds.
His wealth was well known to "Maria," as he called Mrs. Manning, who made several ineffectual attempts to get money out of him.
At last this fiendish woman made up her mind to murder O'Connor and appropriate all his possessions.
Her husband, to whom she coolly confided her intention,
a heavy brutish fellow, was yet aghast at his wife's resolve, and tried hard to dissuade her from bad purpose.
In his confession after sentence he declared that she plied him well with brandy at this period,
and that during the whole time he was never in his right senses.
Meanwhile this woman, unflinching in her cold, bloody determination, carefully laid all her plans for the consummation of the deed.
One fine afternoon in August, O'Connor was met walking in the direction of Bermondsey.
He was dressed with particular care, as he was to dine at the Mannings and meet friends, one a young lady.
He was seen afterwards smoking and talking with his hosts in their back parlor, and never seen again alive.
It came out in the husband's confession that Mrs. Manning induced O'Connor to go down to the kitchen to wash his hands, that she followed him to the basement,
that she stood behind him as he stood near the open grave she herself had dug for him,
and which he mistook for a drain, and that while he was speaking to her she put the muzzle of a pistol close to the back of his head and shot him down.
She ran upstairs, told her husband, made him go down to look at her handiwork, and as O'Connor was not quite dead,
Manning gave the coup de grace with a crowbar.
After this Mrs. Manning changed her dress and went off in a cab to O'Connor's lodgings,
which, having possessed herself of the murdered man's keys, she rifled from end to end.
Returning to her own home, where Manning meantime had been calmly smoking and talking to the neighbors over the basement wall,
the corpse lying just inside the kitchen all the while, the two set to work to strip the body and hide it under the stones of the floor.
This job was not completed till the following day, as the hole had to be enlarged, and the only tool they had was a dust-shovel.
A quantity of quicklime was thrown in with the body to destroy all identification.
This was on a Thursday evening.
For the remainder of that week and part of the next the murderers stayed in the house, and occupied the kitchen, close to the remains of their victim.
On the Sunday Mrs. Manning roasted a goose at this same kitchen fire, and ate it with relish in the afternoon.
This cold-blooded indifference after the event was only outdone by the premeditation of this horrible murder.
The hole must have been excavated and the quicklime purchased quite three weeks before O'Connor met his death,
and during that time he must frequently have stood or sat over his own grave.
Discovery of the murder came in this wise. O'Connor, a punctual and well-conducted official, was at once missed at the London Docks.
On the third day his friends began to inquire for him,
and at their request two police officers were sent to Bermondsey to inquire for him at the Mannings, with whom it was well known that he was very intimate.
The Mannings had seen or heard nothing of him, of course. As O'Connor still did not turn up, the police after a couple of days returned to Minver Place.
The house was empty, bare and stripped of all its furniture, and its former occupants had decamped.
The circumstance was suspicious, and a search was at once made of the whole premises.
In the back kitchen one of the detectives remarked that the cement between certain stones looked lighter than the rest, and on trying it with a knife,
he found that it was soft and new, while elsewhere it was set and hard.
The stones were at once taken up;
beneath them was a layer of fresh mortar, beneath that a lot of loose earth, amongst which a stocking was turned up, and presently a human toe.
Six inches lower the body of O'Connor was uncovered.
He was lying on his face, his legs tied up to his hips so as to allow of the body fitting into the hole.
The lime had done its work so rapidly that the features would have been indistinguishable but for the prominent chin and a set of false teeth.
The corpse settled all doubts, and the next point was to lay hands upon the Mannings.
It was soon ascertained that the wife had gone off in a cab with a quantity of luggage.
Part of this she had deposited to be left till called for at one station, while she had gone herself to another, that at Euston Square.
At the first the boxes were impounded, opened, and found to contain many of O'Connor's effects.
At the second exact information was obtained of Mrs. Manning's movements. She had gone to Edinburgh.
A telegraphic message, then newly adapted to the purposes of criminal detection,
advised the Edinburgh police of the whole affair, and within an hour an answer was telegraphed, stating that Mrs. Manning was in custody.
She had been to brokers to negotiate the sale of certain foreign railway stock, with which they had been warned from London not to deal,
and they had given information to the police.
Her arrest was planned, and, when the telegram arrived from London, completed.
An examination of her boxes disclosed a quantity of O'Connor's property.
Mrs. Manning was transferred to London and lodged in the Horsemonger Lane Jail, where her husband soon afterwards joined her.
He had fled to Jersey, where he was recognized and arrested.
Each tried to throw the blame on the other; Manning declared his wife had committed the murder, Mrs. Manning indignantly denied the charge.
The prisoners were in due course transferred to Newgate, to be put upon their trial at the Central Criminal Court.
A great number of distinguished people assembled as usual at the Old Bailey on the day of trial.
The Mannings were arraigned together; the husband standing at one of the front corners of the dock, his wife at the other end.
Manning, who was dressed in black, appeared to be a heavy, bull-necked, repulsive-looking man, with a very fair complexion and light hair.
Mrs. Manning was not without personal charms;
her face was comely, she had dark hair and good eyes, and was above the middle height, yet inclined to be stout.
She was smartly dressed in a plaid shawl, a white lace cap;
her hair was dressed in long crepe bands. She had lace ruffles at her wrist, and wore primrose-colored kid gloves.
The case rested upon the facts which have been already set forth, and was proved to the satisfaction of the jury, who brought in a verdict of guilty.
Manning, when sentence of death was passed on him, said nothing;
but Mrs. Manning, speaking in a foreign accent, addressed the court with great fluency and vehemence.
She complained that she had no justice; there was no law for her, she had found no protection either from judges, the prosecutor, or her husband.
She had not been treated like a Christian, but like a wild beast of the forest. She declared that the money found in her possession had been sent her from abroad;
that O'Connor had been more to her than her husband, that she ought to have married him.
It was against common sense to charge her with murdering the only friend she had in the world;
the culprit was really her husband, who killed O'Connor out of jealousy and revengeful feelings.
When the judge assumed the black cap
Mrs. Manning became still more violent, shouting, "No, no, I will not stand it! You ought to be ashamed of yourselves!"
and would have left the dock had not Mr. Cope, the governor of Newgate, restrained her.
After judgment was passed she repeatedly cried out Shame!
and stretching out her hand, she gathered up a quantity of the rue which, following ancient custom dating from the days of the jail fever,
was strewn in front of the dock, and sprinkled it towards the bench with a contemptuous gesture.
On being removed to Newgate from the court Mrs. Manning became perfectly furious.
She uttered loud imprecations, cursing judge, jury, barristers, witnesses, and all who stood around.
They had to handcuff her by force against the most violent resistance, and still she raged and stormed,
shaking her clenched and manacled hands in the officers' faces.
From Newgate the Mannings were taken in separate cabs to Horsemonger Lane Jail.
On this journey her manner changed completely. She became flippant, joked with the officers, asked how they liked her "resolution" in the dock,
and expressed the utmost contempt for her husband, whom she never intended to acknowledge or speak to again.
Later her mood changed to abject despair.
On reaching the condemned cell she threw herself upon the floor and shrieked in an hysterical agony of tears.
After this, until the day of execution, she recovered her spirits, and displayed reckless effrontery,
mocking at the chaplain, and turning a deaf ear to the counsels of a benevolent lady who came to visit.
Now she abused the jury, now called Manning a vagabond,
and through all ate heartily at every meal, slept soundly at nights, and talked with cheerfulness on almost any subject.
Nevertheless, she attempted to commit suicide by driving her nails, purposely left long, into her throat.
She was discovered just as she was getting black in the face.
Manning's demeanor was more in harmony with his situation, and the full confession he made
elucidated all dark and uncertain points in connection with the crime.
The actual execution, which took place at another prison than Newgate, is rather beyond the scope of this work.
But it may be mentioned that the concourse was so enormous that it drew down the well-merited and trenchant disapproval of Charles Dickens,
who wrote to the 'Times,' saying that he believed "a sight so inconceivably awful
as the wickedness and levity of the immense crowd collected at the execution this morning could be imagined by no man,
and presented by no heathen land under the sun.
faded in my mind before the atrocious bearing, looks, and language of the assembled spectators.
When I came upon the scene at midnight, the shrillness of the cries and howls that were raised from time to time,
denoting that they came from a concourse of boys and girls already assembled in the best places, made my blood run cold.
It will be in the memory of many that Mrs. Manning appeared on the scaffold in a black satin dress, which was bound tightly round her waist.
This preference brought the costly stuff into disrepute, and its unpopularity lasted for nearly thirty years.
I will briefly describe one or two of the more remarkable murders in the years immediately following, then pass on to another branch of crime.
Robert Marley at the time of his arrest called himself a surgical instrument maker.
It was understood also that he had served in the army as a private, and had, moreover, undergone a sentence of transportation.
But it was supposed that he had been once in a good position, well born, and well educated.
When lying under sentence of death in Newgate, he was visited by a lady, a gentlewoman in every sense of the word, who was said to be his sister.
His determined addiction to evil courses had led to his being cast off by his family,
and he must have been at the end of his resources when he committed the crime for which he suffered.
His offense was the murder of Richard Cope,
a working jeweler, shopman to a Mr. Berry of Parliament Street. It was Cope's duty to stay in the shop till the last, close the shutters,
secure the stock of watches and jewelry, then lock up the place and take on the keys to Mr. Berry's private house in Pimlico.
Cope, a small man, crippled, and of weakly constitution, was alone in the shop about 9:30.
the shutters were up, and he was preparing to close, when Marley entered and fell upon him with a life-preserver,
meaning to kill him and rifle the shop.
The noise of the struggle was heard outside in the street,
and bystanders peeped in through the shutters, but no one entered or sought to interfere in what seemed only a domestic quarrel.
A milliner's porter,
Lerigo, was also attracted by the noise of the row, but after walking a few paces he felt dissatisfied, and returned to the spot.
Pushing the shop-door open, he saw Marley finishing his murderous assault.
Lerigo turned for assistance to take the man into custody.
Marley, disturbed, picked up a cigar and parcel from the counter, then ran out, pursued by Lerigo only.
Marley ran along the street, down into Cannon Row
then into Palace Yard, where the waterman of the cab-tank, in obedience to Lerigo's shouts, collared the fugitive.
Escorted by his two captors, Marley was taken back into Parliament Street to the jeweler's shop.
The policemen were now in possession;
two of them supported Cope, who was still alive, although insensible, and Marley was apprehended. The evidence against him was completed
by his identification by Cope in Westminster Hospital, who survived long enough to make a formal deposition before Mr. Jardine,
the police magistrate, that Marley was the man who had beaten him to death.
Marley at his trial was undefended, and the sheriffs offered him counsel; but he declined. The witnesses against him all spoke the truth, he said;
there was no case to make out; why waste money on lawyers for the defense? His demeanor was cool and collected throughout;
he seemed while in Newgate to realize thoroughly that there was no hope for him, and was determined to face his fate bravely.
After sentence, the Newgate officers who had special charge of him noticed that he slept well and ate well, enjoying all his meals.
One of them went into his cell just at dinner-time;
the great clock of St. Sepulchre's close by was striking the hour, and Marley, who had his elbows on the table,
with his head resting on his hands, looked up and observed calmly, "Go along, clock; come along, gallows."
On the dread morning he came out to execution quite gaily, and tripped up the stairs to the scaffold.
His captors, it may be added (Lerigo and Allen), were warmly commended by the judge for their courage and activity.
The former was given a reward of twenty and the latter of ten pounds.
A murderous assault on a police constable, which so nearly ended fatally that the culprit was sentenced to death, although not executed,
was perpetrated in 1852. The case was accompanied with the most shocking brutality.
Cannon, by trade a chimney-sweep, had long been characterized by the bitterest hatred of the police force,
and had been repeatedly sentenced to imprisonment for most desperate and ferocious attacks upon various constables. His last victim was Dwyer,
a fine young officer who had been summoned to take Cannon into custody when the latter was drunk and riotous in front of a public-house.
Dwyer found Cannon bleeding profusely from a wound in the head, and persuaded him to go to a doctor's.
They walked together quietly for some little distance, then Cannon, without the slightest warning,
threw the constable on his back, and violently assaulted him by jumping on his chest and stomach,
and by getting his hand inside Dwyer's stock, with the idea of strangling him.
Dwyer managed to overpower his assailant, and got to his feet; but Cannon butted at him with his head, and again threw him to the ground,
after which he kicked his prostrate foe in the most brutal and cowardly manner, and until he was almost senseless, and bruised from head to foot.
Once more Dwyer got to his feet, and managed, by drawing his staff, to keep Cannon at bay until a second constable came to his aid.
All this time not one of a numerous body of bystanders offered to assist the policeman in his extremity.
On the contrary, many of them encouraged the brutal assailant in his savage attack.
To Cannon's infinite surprise, he was indicted for attempt to murder, and not for a simple assault, and found guilty.
The judge, in passing sentence of death, told him he richly deserved the punishment.
As Dwyer survived, Cannon escaped the death sentence, which was commuted to penal servitude for life.
A handsome sum was subscribed for the injured constable, who was disabled for life.
Only a few have vied with Cannon in fiendish cruelty and brutality.
One of these was Mobbs, who lived in the Minories,
generally known by the soubriquet of "General Haynau," a name execrated in England about this time.
Mobbs systematically ill-used his wife for a long space of time, and at last cut her throat.
For this he was executed in front of Newgate in 1833.
Emmanuel Barthelemy again,
the French refugee, was a murderer of the same description, who dispatched his victim with a loaded cane, after which, to secure his escape,
he shot an old soldier who had attempted to detain him. He was convicted and executed.
He died impenitent, declaring that he had no belief, and that it was idle to ask forgiveness of God.
I want forgiveness of man; I want those doors (of the prison) opened.
Barthelemy was generally supposed to have been a secret agent of the French police.
I will now pass to grave but less atrocious crimes.
In 1850 occurred the first of a series of gigantic frauds,
which followed each other at no long intervals, which had a strong family likeness, and originated all of them to make money easily,
without capital, and at railroad speed.
Walter Watts was an inventor, a creator, who struck an entirely new and original line of crime.
Employed as a clerk in the Globe Assurance,
he with unusual quickness of apprehension discovered and promptly turned to account an inexcusably lax system of management,
which offered peculiar chances of profit to an ingenious and unscrupulous man.
It was the custom in this office to make the banker's passbook the basis of the entries in the company's ledgers.
Thus, when a payment was made by the company, the amount disbursed was carried to account in the general books from its entry in the passbook,
and without reference to or comparison with the documents in which the payment was claimed.
This passbook, when not at the bank, was in the exclusive custody of Watts.
The cheques drawn by the directors also passed through his hands; to him too they came back to be verified and put by,
after they had been cashed by the bank.
In this way Watts had complete control over the whole of the monetary transactions of the company.
He could do what he liked with the passbook, and by its adoption, as described as the basis of all entries,
there was no independent check upon him if he chose to tamper with it.
This he did to an enormous extent,
continually altering, erasing, and adding figures to correspond with and cover the abstractions he made of various cheques as they were drawn.
It seems incredible that this passbook, which when produced in court
was a mass of blots and erasures, should not have created suspicion of foul play either at the bank or at the company's board.
Implicit confidence appears to have been placed in Watts, who was the son of an old and trusted employee, and, moreover, a young man of plausible address.
Watts led two lives.
In the West End he was a man of fashion, with a town house, a house at Brighton, and a cellar full of good wine at both.
He rode a priceless hack in Rotten Row, or drove down to Richmond in a mail phaeton and pair.
He played high, and spent his nights at the club, or in joyous and dissolute company.
When other pleasures palled he took a theatre, and posed as a munificent patron of the dramatic art.
Under his auspices several "stars" appeared on the boards of the Marylebone theatre,
and later he became manager of the newly rebuilt Olympic at Wych Street.
No one cared too closely to inquire into the sources of wealth. Some said he was a fortunate speculator in stocks,
others that he had had extraordinary luck as a gold-digger. Had his West End and little-informed associates followed him into the city,
whither he was taken every morning in a smart brougham, they would have seen him alight from it in Cornhill,
and walk forward on foot to enter as a humble and unpretending employee the doors of the Globe Assurance office.
Nevertheless, in this position, through the culpable carelessness which left him unfettered, he managed between 1844
and 1850 to embezzle and apply to his own purposes some £71,000.
The detection of these frauds came while he was still prominently before the world as the lessee of the Olympic.
Rumors were abroad that serious defalcations had been discovered in one of the insurance offices,
but it was long before the public realized that the fraudulent clerk and the great theatrical manager were one and the same person.
Watts's crime was discovered by the secretary of the Globe Company, who came suddenly upon the extensive falsification of the passbook.
An inquiry was at once set on foot, and the frauds were traced to Watts.
The latter, when first taxed with his offense, protested his innocence boldly, and positively denied all knowledge of the affair;
and he had so cleverly destroyed all traces that it was not easy to bring home the charge.
But it was proved that Watts had appropriated one cheque for £1400,
which he had paid into his own bankers, and on this he was committed to Newgate for trial.
There were two counts in the indictment: one for stealing a cheque value £1400, the second for stealing a bit of paper value one penny.
The jury found him guilty of the latter only, with a point of law reserved. This was fully argued before three judges,
and not for the slight offense as it appeared on the record.
The sentence of the court, one of ten years' transportation, struck the prisoner with dismay.
He had been led to suppose that twelve months' imprisonment was the utmost the law could inflict, and he broke down utterly under the unexpected blow.
That same evening he committed suicide in Newgate.
The details of the suicide were given at the inquest. Watts had been in ill-health from the time of his first arrest.
In Giltspur Street Compter, where he was first lodged
he showed symptoms of delirium tremens, and admitted that he had been addicted to the excessive use of stimulants.
His health improved, but was still indifferent when he was brought up for sentence, and he was an occupant of the Newgate infirmary.
He returned from court in a state of gloomy dejection,
and in the middle of the night one of the fellow-prisoners who slept in the same ward noticed that he was not in his bed.
This man got up to look for him, and found him hanging from the bars of a neighboring room.
He had made use of a piece of rope cut out from the sacking of his bedstead, and had tied his feet together with a silk pocket-handkerchief.
The prison officers were called, but Watts was quite cold and stiff when he was cut down.
Strange to say, a second suicide occurred in Newgate the same night,
that of a prize-fighter named Donovan, tried the same day, and convicted of manslaughter.
Sentence of death had been recorded against Donovan, who, like Watts, had seemingly been overcome with sudden despair.
In 1853 a second case of gigantic fraud alarmed and scandalized the financial world.
It outshone the defalcations of Watts.
Nothing to equal the excitement caused by the forgeries of Robert Ferdinand Pries had been known before in the city of London.
He was a corn merchant who operated largely in grain.
So enormous were his transactions, that they often affected the markets, and caused great fluctuations in prices.
These had been attributed to political action; some thought that the large purchases in foreign grains, effected at losing prices,
were intended by the protectionists to depress the wheat market, and secure the support of the farmers at the forthcoming election;
others, that Napoleon III., but recently proclaimed Emperor of the French, wished to gain the popularity necessary to secure the people.
Few realized that these mysterious operations were the "convulsive attempt" of a ruined and dishonest speculator to sustain his credit.
Pries, although enjoying a high reputation in the city, had long been in a bad way.
His extensive business had been carried on by fraud.
His method was to obtain advances twice over on the same bills of lading or corn warrants. The duplicates were forged.
In this way he obtained vast sums from several firms, and one to which he was indebted upwards of £50,000 subsequently stopped payment.
Pries at length was discovered
through a dishonored cheque for £3000, paid over as an installment of £18,000 owing for an advance on warrants.
Inquiries were instituted when the cheque was protested, which led to the discovery of the forgeries.
Pries was lodged in Newgate, tried at the Old Bailey, and transported for life.
Another set of frauds, which resembled those of Pries in principle, although not in practice, were soon afterwards discovered.
proposed to gain the capital he needed for business purposes by raising money on dock warrants for imported goods which had no real existence.
When such goods arrived they were frequently left at a wharf, paying rent until it suited the importer to remove them.
The dock warrant was issued by the wharfinger as certificate that he held the goods.
The warrant thus represented money, and was often used as such, being endorsed and passed from hand to hand as other negotiable bills.
Cole's plan was to have a wharf of his own, nominally occupied by a creature trading as Maltby and Co.
Goods would be landed at this wharf;
Maltby and Co. would issue warrants on them deliverable to the importer, and the goods were then passed to be stored in neighboring warehouses.
The owners of the latter would then issue a second set of warrants on these goods, in total ignorance of the fact that they were already pledged.
Cole quickly raised money on both sets of warrants. He carried on this game for some time with great success,
and so developed his business that in one year his transactions amounted to a couple of millions of pounds.
He had several narrow escapes.
Once a warrant-holder sent down a clerk to view certain goods, and the clerk found that these goods had already a "stop" upon them, or were pledged.
Cole escaped by throwing the blame on a careless partner, and at once removed the "stop."
Again, some of the duplicate and fictitious warrants were held by a firm which suspended payment, and there was no knowing into whose hands they might fall.
Cole found out where they were, and redeemed them at a heavy outlay, thus obtaining business relations with the firm that held them,
which were soon developed, much to that firm's subsequent anger and regret.
Last of all, the well-known bankers Overend and Gurney, whose own affairs created much excitement some years later,
wishing to verify the value of warrants they held, and sending to Maltby and Co.'s wharf, found out half the truth.
These bankers, wishing for more specific information,
asked Davidson and Gordon, a firm with which Cole was closely allied, whether the warrants meant goods or nothing.
They could not deny that the latter was the truth, and were forthwith stigmatized by Mr. Chapman, Overend and Gurney's representative, as rogues.
Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 18: Newgate notorieties continued, part 3.
The course of the swindlers was by no means smooth, but it was not till 1854 that suspicion arose that anything was wrong.
A firm which held a lot of warrants suddenly demanded the delivery of the goods they covered.
The goods having no existence, Cole of course could not deliver them.
About this time Davidson and Gordon, the people above-mentioned,
who had fraudulent warrants out of their own to the extent of £150,000, suspended payment and absconded.
This affected Cole's credit, and ugly reports were in circulation charging him with the issue of simulated warrants.
These indeed were out to the value of £367,800.
Cole's difficulties increased more and more; warrant-holders came down upon him demanding to realize their goods.
Cole now suspended payment.
Maltby, who had bolted, was pursued and arrested, to end his life miserably by committing suicide in a Newgate cell.
Cole too was apprehended, and in due course tried at the Central Criminal Court.
He was found guilty, and sentenced to the seemingly inadequate punishment of four years' transportation.
Davidson and Gordon were also sentenced to imprisonment.
A more distressing case stands next on the criminal records --
the failure and subsequent sentence of the bankers Messrs. Strahan, Paul, and Bates,
for the fraudulent disposal of securities lodged in their hands. This firm was one of the oldest banking establishments in the kingdom,
and dated back to the Commonwealth, when, under the title of Snow and Walton, it carried on business as pawnbrokers.
The Strahan of the firm which came to grief was a Snow who changed his name for a fortune of £200,000;
he was a man esteemed and respected in society and the world of finance, incapable as it was thought of a dishonest deed.
Sir John Dean Paul had inherited a baronetcy from his father, together with an honored name;
he was himself a prominent member of the Low Church, of austere piety, active in all good works.
Mr. Bates had been confidential managing clerk, and was taken into the firm not alone as a reward for long and faithful service
but that he might strengthen it by his long experience and known business capacity.
The bank enjoyed an excellent reputation, it had a good connection, and was supposed to be perfectly sound.
Moreover, the partners were sober, steady men, who paid unremitting attention to business.
Yet even so early as the death of the first Sir John Paul,
the bank was insolvent, and instead of starting on a fresh life with a new name, it should then and there have closed its doors.
In December 1851 the balance sheet showed a deficiency of upwards of £70,000.
The bank had been conducted on false principles;
it had assumed enormous responsibilities -- on one side by the ownership of the Mostyn collieries, a valueless property,
and on the other by backing up
an impecunious and rotten firm of contractors with vast liabilities and pledged to impossible works abroad.
The engagements of the bank on these two heads amounting to nearly half a million of money,
produced immediate embarrassment and financial distress.
The bank was already insolvent,
and the partners had to decide between suspending payment or continuing to hold its head above water by flagitious processes.
They chose, unhappily for themselves, the latter alternative.
Money they must have, and money they raised to meet their urgent necessities upon the balances and securities deposited with them by their customers.
This borrowing continued, and on such a scale that their paper was soon at a discount,
and the various discount houses would not advance sufficient sums to relieve the necessities of the bank.
Then it was that instead of merely pledging securities, the bank sold them outright, and thus passed the Rubicon of fraud.
This went on for some time, and might never have been discovered had some good stroke of luck provided any of the partners
with money enough to retrieve the position of the bank. But that passed from bad to worse;
the firm's paper went down further and further in value; an application to the Committee of Bankers for assistance was peremptorily refused,
then came a run on the bank, and it was compelled to stop payment.
Its debts amounted to three-quarters of a million, and the dividend it eventually paid was three and twopence in the pound.
But worse than the bankruptcy was the confession made by the partners in the court.
They admitted that they had made away with many of the securities entrusted to their keeping.
Following this, warrants were issued for their arrest,
the specific charge being the unlawful negotiation of Danish bonds and other shares belonging to the Rev. Dr. Griffiths of Rochester
to the value of £20,000.
Bates was at once captured in Norfolk Street, Strand.
Police officers went down at night to Nutfield, near Reigate, and arrested Sir John Paul, but allowed the prisoner to sleep there.
Next morning they only just saved the train to town, and left Sir John behind on the platform, but he subsequently surrendered himself.
Mr. Strahan was arrested at a friend's house in Bryanston Square.
All three were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to fourteen years' transportation, passing some time in Newgate en route.
Bates, the least guilty, was pardoned in 1858.
Two cases of extensive embezzlement which were discovered almost simultaneously, those of Robson and Redpath,
will long be remembered both within and without the commercial world.
They both reproduced many of the features of the case of Watts, already described,
but in neither did the sums misappropriated reach quite the same high figure.
But neither Robson nor Redpath would have been able to pursue their fraudulent designs with success had they not, like Watts,
been afforded peculiar facilities by the slackness of system and the want of methodical administration in the concerns by which they were employed.
Robson was of humble origin, but he was well educated, and he had some literary abilities.
His proclivities were theatrical, and he was the author of several plays,
one at least of which, 'Love and Loyalty,' with Wallack in a leading part, achieved a certain success.
He began life as a law-writer, earning thereby some fifteen or eighteen shillings a week;
but the firm he served got him a situation as clerk in the office of the Great Northern Railway,
whence he passed to a better position under the Crystal Palace Company.
He now married, although his salary was only a pound a week; but he soon got on.
He had a pleasant address, showed good business aptitudes, and quickly acquired the approval of his superiors.
Within a year he was advanced to the post of chief clerk in the transfer department, at a salary of £150 a year.
His immediate chief was a Mr. Fasson, upon whose confidence he gained so rapidly, through his activity, industry, and engaging manners,
that ere long the whole management of the transfer department was entrusted to him.
Some time elapsed before Robson succumbed to temptation.
He was not the first man of loose morality and expensive tastes
who preferred to risk his future reputation and liberty to the present discomfort of living upon narrow means.
The temptation was all the greater because the chances of successful fraud lay ready to hand.
Shares in the company were represented by certificates, which often enough never left the company's, or more exactly Robson's, hands.
He conceived the idea of transferring shares, bogus shares from a person who held none, to any one who would buy them in the open market.
He took it for granted that the certificates representing these bogus shares, and which practically did not exist, would never be called for.
This ingenious method of raising funds he adopted and carried on without detection,
till the defalcations from fraudulent transfers and fraudulent issues combined amounted to £27,000.
With the proceeds of these flagitious frauds Robson feasted and made merry.
He kept open house at Kilburn Priory;
entertained literary, artistic, and dramatic celebrities; had a smart "turn out," attended all the race-meetings, and dressed in the latest fashion.
To his wife, poor soul, he made no pretense of fidelity, and she enjoyed only so much of his company as was necessarily spent
in receiving guests at home, or could be spared from two rival establishments in other parts of the town.
To account for his revenues he pretended to have been very lucky on the Stock Exchange, which was at one time true to a limited extent,
and to have succeeded in other speculations.
When his friends asked why he, a wealthy man of independent means, continued to slave on as a clerk on a pittance,
he replied gaily that his regular work at the Crystal Palace office was useful as a sort of discipline, and kept him steady.
All this time his position was one of extreme insecurity. He was standing over a mine which at any moment might explode.
The blow fell suddenly, and when least expected. One morning Mr. Fasson asked casually for certain certificates,
whether representing real or fictitious shares does not appear; but they were certificates connected in some way with Robson's long practiced frauds
and he could not produce them. His chief asked sternly where they were.
Robson said they were at Kilburn Priory.
Let us go to Kilburn for them together," said Mr. Fasson, growing suspicious.|"Let us go to Kilburn for them together," said Mr. Fasson, growing suspicious. LJ015-0100|They drove there, and Robson on arrival did the honors of his house, rang for lunch to gain time,|They drove there, and Robson on arrival did the honors of his house, rang for lunch to gain time, LJ015-0101|but at Mr. Fasson's pressing demands went upstairs to fetch the certificates.|but at Mr. Fasson's pressing demands went upstairs to fetch the certificates. LJ015-0102|He came back to explain that he had mislaid them.|He came back to explain that he had mislaid them. LJ015-0103|Mr. Fasson, more and more ill at ease, would not accept this subterfuge, and declared they must be found.|Mr. Fasson, more and more ill at ease, would not accept this subterfuge, and declared they must be found. LJ015-0104|Robson again left him, but only to gather together hastily all the money and valuables on which he could lay his hands, with which he left the house.|Robson again left him, but only to gather together hastily all the money and valuables on which he could lay his hands, with which he left the house. LJ015-0105|Mr. Fasson waited and waited for his subordinate to re-appear, and at last discovered his flight.|Mr. Fasson waited and waited for his subordinate to re-appear, and at last discovered his flight. LJ015-0106|A reward was forthwith offered for Robson's apprehension.|A reward was forthwith offered for Robson's apprehension. LJ015-0107|Meanwhile the absconding clerk had coolly driven to a favorite dining-place in the West End,|Meanwhile the absconding clerk had coolly driven to a favorite dining-place in the West End, LJ015-0108|where a fish curry and a brace of partridges were set before him,|where a fish curry and a brace of partridges were set before him, LJ015-0109|and he discussed the latter with appetite, but begged that they would never give him curry again, as he did not like it.|and he discussed the latter with appetite, but begged that they would never give him curry again, as he did not like it. LJ015-0110|After dinner he went into hiding for a day or two,|After dinner he went into hiding for a day or two, LJ015-0111|then, accompanied by a lady, not Mrs. Robson, he took steamer and started for Copenhagen.|then, accompanied by a lady, not Mrs. Robson, he took steamer and started for Copenhagen. LJ015-0112|But the continental police had been warned to look out for him, and two Danish inspectors got upon his track,|But the continental police had been warned to look out for him, and two Danish inspectors got upon his track, LJ015-0113|followed him over to Sweden, and arrested him at Helsingfors.|followed him over to Sweden, and arrested him at Helsingfors. LJ015-0114|Thence he was transferred to Copenhagen and surrendered in due course to a London police officer.|Thence he was transferred to Copenhagen and surrendered in due course to a London police officer. LJ015-0115|Little more remains to be said about Robson. He appears to have accepted his position, and to have at once resigned himself to his fate.|Little more remains to be said about Robson. He appears to have accepted his position, and to have at once resigned himself to his fate. LJ015-0116|When brought to trial he took matters very coolly, and at first pleaded "Not Guilty," but subsequently withdrew the plea.|When brought to trial he took matters very coolly, and at first pleaded "Not Guilty," but subsequently withdrew the plea. LJ015-0117|Sergeant Ballantine, who prosecuted,|Sergeant Ballantine, who prosecuted, LJ015-0118|paid him the compliment of describing him as "a young man of great intelligence, considerable powers of mind,|paid him the compliment of describing him as "a young man of great intelligence, considerable powers of mind, LJ015-0119|and possessed of an education very much beyond the rank of life to which he originally belonged.
Robson was found guilty, and sentenced to two terms of transportation, one for twenty and one for fourteen years.
Newgate officers who remember Robson still describe him as a fine young man, who behaved well as a prisoner,
but who had all the appearance of a careless, thoughtless, happy-go-lucky fellow.
In many respects the embezzlement of which Leopold Redpath was guilty closely resembled that of Robson,
but it was based upon more extended and audacious forgeries.
Redpath's crime arose from his peculiar and independent position as registrar of stock of the Great Northern Railway Company.
This offered him great facilities for the creation of artificial stock, its sale from a fictitious holder, and transfer to himself.
All the signatures in the transfer were forged. Not only did he thus transfer and realize "bogus" stock
but he bought bona fide amounts, and increased their value by altering the figures,
by inserting say 1 before 500, and thus making it
fifteen hundred pounds, which larger amount was duly carried to his credit on the register, and entered upon the certificates of transfer.
By these means Redpath misappropriated vast sums during a period extending over ten years.
The total amount was never exactly made out, but the false stock created and issued by him was estimated at two hundred twenty thousand pounds.
Even when the bubble burst Redpath, who had lived at the rate of twenty thousand a year,
had assets in the shape of land, house, furniture, pictures, and objets d'art to the value of £50,000.
He began in a very small way.
First a lawyer's clerk, he then got an appointment in the Peninsular and Oriental Company's office;
afterwards he set up as an insurance broker on his own account, but presently failed.
His fault was generosity,
an open-handed, unthinking charity which gave freely to the poor and needy the money which belonged to his creditors.
After his bankruptcy he obtained a place as clerk in the Great Northern Railway office,
from which he rose to be assistant registrar, with the special duties of transferring shares.
He soon proved his ability, and by unremitting attention mastered the whole work of the office.
Later on he became registrar, and in this more independent position
developed to a colossal extent the frauds he had already practiced as a subordinate.
Now he launched out into great expenditure, took a house in Chester Terrace, and became known as a Maecenas and patron of the arts.
He had a nice taste in bric-à-brac, and was considered a good judge of pictures.
Leading social and artistic personages were to be met with at his house, and his hospitality was far famed.
The choicest wines, the finest fruits,
peas at ten shillings a quart, five-guinea pines, and early asparagus were to be found on his table.
But his chief extravagance, his favorite folly, was the exercise of an ostentatious benevolence.
The philanthropy he had displayed in a small way when less prosperous became now a passion.
His name headed every subscription list; his purse was always open.
Not content with giving where assistance was solicited, he himself sought out deserving cases and personally afforded relief.
When the crash came there were pensioners and other recipients of his bounty who could not believe
that so good a man had really been for years a swindler and a rogue.
Down at Weybridge, where he had a country place, his name was long remembered with gratitude by the poor.
During the days of his prosperity he was a governor of Christ's Hospital,
of the St. Ann's Society, and one of the supporters and managers of the Patriotic Fund.
In his person he was neat and fastidious;
he patronized the best tailors, and had a fashionable coiffeur from Hanover Square daily to curl his hair.
There was something dramatic in Redpath's detection
Just after Robson's frauds had agitated the minds of all directors of companies, the chairman of the Great Northern (Mr. Denison)
was standing at a railway station talking to a certain well-known peer of the realm.
Redpath passed and lifted his hat to his chairman; the latter acknowledged the salute.
But the peer rushed forward and shook Redpath warmly by the hand.
What do you know of our clerk?" asked Mr. Denison of his lordship. "Only that he is a capital fellow, who gives the best dinners and balls in town.
Redpath had industriously circulated reports that he had prospered greatly in speculation;
but the chairman of the Great Northern could not realize that a clerk of the company could honestly be in the possession of unlimited wealth.
It was at once decided at the board to make a thorough examination of all his books.
Redpath was called in and informed of the intended investigation. He tried to stave off the evil hour by declaring that everything was perfectly right;
but finding he could not escape, he said he would resign his post, and leaving the boardroom, disappeared.
The inquiry soon revealed the colossal character of the frauds.
Warrants were issued for Redpath's arrest, but he had flown to Paris.
Thither police officers followed, only to find that he had returned to London.
A further search discovered him at breakfast at a small house in the New Road.
He was arrested, examined before a police magistrate, and committed to Newgate.
Great excitement prevailed in the city and the West End when Redpath's defalcations were made public.
The Stock Market was greatly affected, and society, more especially that which frequents Exeter Hall, was convulsed.
The Central Criminal Court, when the trial came on,
was densely crowded, and many curious eyes were turned upon the somewhat remarkable man who occupied the dock.
He is described by a contemporary account as a fresh-looking man of forty years of age, slightly bald, inclined to embonpoint,
and thoroughly embodying the idea of English respectability.
His manner was generally self-possessed, but his face was marked with "uneasy earnestness,"
and he looked about him with wayward, furtive glances.
When the jury found a verdict of guilty he remained unmoved. He listened without emotion to the judge's well-merited censures,
and received his sentence of transportation for life without much surprise.
Redpath passed away into the outer darkness of a penal colony, where he was still living a year or two back
But his name lingers still in this country as that of the first swindler of his time,
and the prototype of a class not uncommon in our later days
that of dishonest rogues who assume piety and philanthropy as a cloak for their misdeeds.
In Newgate Redpath is remembered by the prison officer as a difficult man to deal with.
From the moment of his reception he gave himself great airs, as a martyr and a man heavily wronged.
By-and-by, when escape seemed hopeless, and after sentence, he suddenly degenerated into the lowest stamp of criminal,
and behaved so as to justify a belief that he had been a jail-bird all his life.
It has been already remarked in these pages that with changed social conditions came a great change in the character of crimes.
Highway robberies, for instance, had disappeared, if we except the spasmodic and severely repressed outbreak of "garotting,"
which at one time spread terror throughout London. Thieves preferred now to use ingenuity rather than brute force.
It was no longer possible to stop a coach or carriage, or rob the postman who carried the mail.
The improved methods of locomotion had put a stop to these depredations. People traveled in company, as a rule;
only when single and unprotected were they in any danger of attack, and that but rarely.
There were still big prizes, however, to tempt the daring, and none appealed more to the thievish instinct than the custom of transmitting gold by rail.
The precious metal was sent from place to place carefully locked up and guarded, no doubt;
but were the precautions too minute, the vigilance too close to be eluded or overcome?
This was the question which presented itself to the fertile brain of one Pierce,
who had been concerned in various "jobs" of a dishonest character, and who for the moment was a clerk in a betting office.
He laid the suggestion before Agar, a professional thief, who was of opinion it contained elements of success.
But the collusion and active assistance of employees of the railway carriers were indispensable, and together
they sounded one Burgess, a guard on the South-Eastern Railway, a line by which large quantities of bullion were sent to the Continent.
Burgess detailed the whole system of transmission.
The gold, packed in an iron-bound box, was securely lodged in safes locked with patent Chubbs.
Each safe had three sets of double keys, all held by confidential servants of the company.
One pair was with the traffic superintendent in London, another with an official in Folkestone,
a third with the captain of the Folkestone and Boulogne boat.
At the other side of the Channel the French railway authorities took charge.
The safes while on the line en route between London and Folkestone were in the guard's van.
This was an important step, and they might easily be robbed some day when Burgess was the guard, provided only that they could be opened.
The next step was to get impressions and fabricate false keys.
A new accomplice was now needed within the company's establishment, and Pierce looked about long before he found the right person.
At last he decided to enlist one Tester, a clerk in the traffic department, whom he thought would prove a likely tool.
The four waited patiently for their opportunity,
which came when the safes were sent to Chubbs' to be repaired; and Chubbs sent them back, but only with one key,
in such a way that Tester had possession of this key for a time.
He lent it to Agar for a brief space, who promptly took an impression on wax. But the safes had a double lock;
the difficulty was to get a copy of the second key.
This was at length effected by Agar and Pierce.
After hanging about the Folkestone office for some time, they saw at last that the key was kept in a certain cupboard.
Still watching and waiting for the first chance, they seized it when the clerks left the office empty for a moment.
Pierce boldly stepped in, found the cupboard unlocked; he removed the key, handed it to Agar outside,
who quickly took the wax impression, handed it back to Pierce; Pierce replaced it, left the office, and the thing was done.
After this nothing remained but to wait for some occasion when the amount transmitted would be sufficient to justify the risks of robbery.
It was Tester's business, who had access to the railway company's books, to watch for this.
Meanwhile the others completed their preparations with the utmost care.
A weight of shot was bought and stowed in carpet bags ready to replace exactly the abstracted gold.
Courier bags were bought to carry the "stuff" slung over the shoulders;
and last, but not least, Agar frequently traveled up and down the line to test the false keys he had manufactured with Pierce's assistance.
Burgess admitted him into the guard's van, where he fitted and filed the keys till they worked easily and satisfactorily in the locks of the safe.
One night Tester whispered to Agar and Pierce, "All right," as they cautiously lounged about London Bridge.
The thieves took first-class tickets, handed their bags full of shot to the porters, who placed them in the guard's van.
Just as the train was starting Agar slipped into the van with Burgess, and Pierce got into a first-class carriage.
Agar at once got to work on the first safe.
opened it, took out and broke into the bullion box, removed the gold, substituted the shot from a carpet bag,
re-fastened and re-sealed the bullion box, and replaced it in the safe.
At Redhill Tester met the train and relieved the thieves of a portion of the stolen gold.
At the same station Pierce joined Agar in the guard's van, and there were now three to carry on the robbery.
The two remaining safes were attacked and nearly entirely despoiled in the same way as the first, and the contents transferred to the courier bags.
The train was now approaching Folkestone, and Agar and Pierce hid themselves in a dark part of the van.
At that station the safes were given out, heavy with shot, not gold; the thieves went on to Dover, and by-and-by,
with Ostend tickets previously procured, returned to London without mishap, and by degrees disposed of much of the stolen gold.
The theft was discovered at Boulogne, when the boxes were found not to weigh exactly what they ought. But no clue was obtained to the thieves,
and the theft might have remained a mystery but for the subsequent bad faith of Pierce to his accomplice Agar.
The latter was ere long arrested on a charge of uttering forged cheques, convicted, and sentenced to transportation for life.
When he knew that he could not escape his fate,
he handed over to Pierce a sum of £3000, his own, whether rightly or wrongly acquired never came out,
together with the unrealized part of the bullion, amounting in all to some £15,000,
and begged his accomplice to invest it as a settlement on a woman named Kay, by whom he had had a child.
Pierce made Kay only a few small payments, then appropriated the rest of the money.
Kay, who had been living with Agar at the time of the bullion robbery,
went to the police in great fury and distress, and disclosed all she knew of the affair.
Agar too, in Newgate, heard how Pierce had treated him, and at once readily turned approver.
As the evidence he gave incriminated Pierce, Burgess, and Tester, all three were arrested and committed to Newgate for trial.
The whole strange story, the long incubation and the elaborate accomplishment of the plot,
came out at the Old Bailey, and was acknowledged to be one of the most extraordinary on record.
Scarcely had the conviction of these daring and astute thieves been assured, than another gigantic fraud was brought to light.
The series of boldly-conceived and cleverly-executed forgeries in which James Townshend Saward, commonly called "Jem the Penman,"
was the prime mover,
has probably no parallel in the annals of crime. Saward himself is a striking and in some respects an unique figure in criminal history.
A man of birth and education, a member of the bar, and of acknowledged legal attainments, his proclivities were all downward.
Instead of following an honorable profession, he preferred to turn his great natural talents and ready wits to the most nefarious practices.
He was known to the whole criminal fraternity as a high-class receiver of stolen goods, a negotiator more especially of stolen paper,
cheques and bills, of which he made a particular use.
He dealt too in the precious metals, when they had been improperly acquired,
and it was to him that Agar, Pierce, and the rest applied when seeking to dispose of their stolen bullion.
But Saward's operations were mainly directed to the fabrication and uttering of forged cheques.
His method was comprehensive and deeply laid.
Burglars brought him the cheques they stole from houses, thieves what they got in pocketbooks.
Cheques blank and canceled were his stock-in-trade. The former he filled up by exact imitation of the latter, signature and all.
When he could get nothing but the blank cheque, he set in motion all sorts of schemes for obtaining signatures, such as
commencing sham actions, and addressing formal applications, merely for the reply.
One stroke of luck which he turned to great account
was the return from transportation of an old "pal" and confederate, who brought with him some bills of exchange.
Saward's method of negotiating the cheques was equally well planned.
Like his great predecessor Old Patch, he never went to a bank himself, nor did any of his accomplices.
The bearer of the cheque was always innocent and ignorant of the fraudulent nature of the document he presented.
In order to obtain messengers of this sort, Saward answered advertisements of persons seeking employment,
and when these presented themselves, entrusted them as a beginning with the duty of cashing cheques.
A confederate followed the emissary closely,
not only to ensure fair play and the surrender of the proceeds if the cheque was cashed, but to give timely notice if it was not,
so that Saward and the rest might make themselves scarce.
As each transaction was carried out from a different address, and a different messenger always employed,
the forgers always escaped detection. But fate overtook two of the gang,
partly through their own carelessness, when transferring their operations to Yarmouth.
One named Hardwicke assumed the name of Ralph, and, to obtain commercial credit in Yarmouth, paid in £250 to a Yarmouth bank
as coming from a Mr. Whitney.
He forgot to add that it was to be placed to Ralph's credit, and when he called as Ralph,
he was told it was only at Mr. Whitney's disposal, and that it could be paid to no one else.
Hardwicke, or "Ralph," appealed to Saward in his difficulty
and that clever schemer sent an elaborate letter of instructions how to ask for the money.
But while Hardwicke was in communication with Saward, the bank was in communication with London
and the circumstances were deemed sufficiently suspicious to warrant the arrest of the gentlemen at Yarmouth on a charge of forgery and conspiracy.
Saward's letter to Hardwicke fell into the hands of the police and compromised him.
While Hardwicke and Atwell were in Newgate awaiting trial, active search was made for Saward,
who was at length taken in a coffee-shop near Oxford Street, under the name of Hopkins. He resisted at first, and denied his identity,
but on being searched, two blank cheques of the London and Westminster Bank were found in his pocket.
He then confessed that he was the redoubtable Jem Saward, or Jem the Penman, and was conveyed to a police-court, and thence to Newgate.
At his trial Atwell and Hardwicke, two of his chief allies and accomplices, turned approvers,
and the whole scheme of systematic forgery was laid bare.
The evidence was corroborated by that of many of the victims who had acted as messengers,
and others who swore to the meetings of the conspirators and their movements. Saward was found guilty,
and the judge, in passing sentence on him of transportation for life, expressed deep regret that "the ingenuity, skill, and talent,
which had received so perverted and mistaken direction,
had not been guided by a sense of virtue, and directed to more honorable and useful pursuits.
The proceeds of these forgeries amounted, it was said, to some thousands per annum.
Saward spent all his share at low gaming houses, and in all manner of debaucheries.
He was in person a short, square-built man of gentlemanly address, sharp and shrewd in conversation and manner.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 19: Later Records
The old notion always prevailed that Newgate was impregnable, so to speak, from within,
and that none of its inmates could hope to escape from its secure precincts.
Yet the jail, in spite of its fortress-like aspect, was by no means really safe.
Year after year prisoners determined to get free, and occasionally succeeded in their efforts.
The inspectors' reports mention many cases of evasion accomplished.
There were others less successful.
Charles Thomas White, awaiting execution for arson, made a desperate effort to escape from Newgate in 1827.
He had friends and auxiliaries inside the jail and out. The cell he occupied was near the outer wall,
and had he but been able to remove its iron bars, he might have descended into Newgate Street by means of a rope ladder.
The ladder was actually made, of black sewing-thread firmly and closely interwoven. But White could not remove the bars;
the instruments needed for the purpose never reached him.
It was noticed that he was most anxious to receive a pair of shoes for which he had asked, and when they arrived they were closely examined.
Sewn in between the upper and lower leathers several spring saws were found, which would have easily cut through any bars.
White, when taxed with his attempt, admitted that the accusation was true, and spoke "with pride and satisfaction of the practicability of his scheme."
There is an attempt at escape mentioned in Mr. Wakefield's book, which might have been an intended suicide.
John Williams, a young fellow only twenty-three years of age, awaited execution in 1827 for stealing in a dwelling-house.
On the very morning on which he was to suffer he eluded the vigilance, such as it was, of his officers
and climbed up the pipe of a cistern in the corner of the press yard; some thought with the idea of drowning himself.
He never reached the cistern, but fell back into the yard, injuring his legs severely.
Although his execution was imminent, a surgeon attended to his wounds, and he was carried more dead than alive to the scaffold.
A harrowing scene followed;
the wounds broke open and bled profusely while the last dread penalty was being performed, to the manifest excitement and indignation of the crowd.
A more daring and skilful escape was effected in 1836 by the chimney-sweep Henry Williams,
who, while detained in the press-yard as a capital convict, under sentence of death for burglary,
managed to get away in the very same spot where his namesake had nine years before so miserably failed.
Escape seemed absolutely hopeless,
and would certainly have been impossible to any one less nimble than a chimney-sweep, trained under the old system to ascend the most intricate flues.
Even after Williams had got out, persons were disposed to disbelieve that the escape had been accomplished in the manner indicated;
they preferred to credit it to carelessness or collusion from officers of the jail.
Yet from the circumstantial account given by Williams after recapture, there can be little doubt that he got away as will be described.
Williams as a capital convict was lodged in the press-yard or condemned ward.
He had access to the airing yard, and there was for hours no kind of supervision.
In one corner of the airing yard stood a cistern at some height from the ground;
the wall beneath and above it was "rusticated," in other words, the granite surface had become roughened, and offered a sort of foothold.
About fifty feet from the ground level, and above the cistern, a revolving chevaux-de-frise of iron was fixed,
with only a short interval between it and the wall, supported by a horizontal iron railing with upright points;
in the wall above the chevaux-de-frise projected a series of iron spikes sharp enough to forbid further ascent.
Williams surveyed these formidable obstacles to evasion, and calmly proceeded to surmount them.
His first task was to gain the top of the cistern; this he effected by keeping his back to one side of the angle,
and working with his hands behind him, while he used his bare feet like claws upon the other side of the wall angle.
The condition of the stone surface just mentioned assisted him in this, and he managed to get beyond the cistern to the railing below the chevaux-de-frise.
The least slip now would have been fatal to him. But he could not thrust his body in through the narrow space left by the chevaux-de-frise,
and was compelled to work along the railing round three-quarters of the square of the yard,
and at length reached a point opposite the top of the building containing the condemned wards. This had been a perilous and painful task;
the spikes of the railing penetrated his flesh and made progression slow and difficult.
But the worst part of the business was to jump from this irksome foothold of the iron grating on to the top of the building just mentioned,
a distance of eight or nine feet.
He had here completed his ascent.
His next job was to descend outside Newgate.
Clambering along the roof,
he passed to the top of the ordinary's residence, hoping to find an open sky-light by which he might enter and so work downstairs.
If the worst came to the worst, he intended to have gone down some chimney, as he had often done before in the way of business.
But he did not like the risk of entering a room by the fireplace, and the chances of detection it offered.
He traversed vainly all the roofs in Newgate Street,
running a great risk of discovery as he passed by a lot of workmen at Tyler's manufactory in Warwick Square, which had formerly been the College of Physicians.
As his coat was an encumbrance, he left it on the top of the third house in Newgate Street, and thus in shirt-sleeves, barefoot and bareheaded,
he worked along to the roofs in Warwick Lane.
Here he came upon a woman on the leads hanging out clothes to dry.
Williams concealed himself behind a chimney till she had re-entered her garret,
and then following her down a step ladder into the house, told his story, appealed to and won her compassion.
She suffered him to pass downstairs.
Below he met another woman and a girl, both of whom were terrified at his appearance, but
when he explained that he was running away from the gallows they left him the road clear.
To walk out into the street was an easy affair, and he was now free, with one and fourpence in his pocket and a shirt and trousers for all his clothing.
Denied admission everywhere as a ragged, half-naked beggar,
he tramped across London Bridge to Wandsworth, where he refreshed himself with a pint of strong ale, the first sustenance he had taken since his escape,
and continued his march to Kingston, where he slept soundly under a hedge till next morning.
Entering a town, he obtained employment at once as a chimney-sweep
from a widow woman, who gave him "bub and grub," or food and one-and-sixpence, for every nine days' work.
Dissatisfied with this remuneration, he again took to the road, and tramped into Hampshire,
where he presently committed a burglary at Lymington, was caught, and lodged in Winchester Jail.
Mr. Cope, the governor of Newgate, having been communicated with, proceeded to Winchester, where he at once identified Williams.
The success, although very short-lived, which attended him, no doubt inspired other inmates of Newgate to follow his example.
It was for some time after this a constant practice to go up the chimneys in the hopes of escaping by the flue.
Even then, however, irons across barred the ascent after a certain distance, and in no one case did a fugitive get clear away.
A man named Lears, under sentence of transportation for an attempt at murder on board ship, got up part of the way,
but had to come down again covered with soot and filth just as the officers entered the ward.
Lears was rewarded by being obliged to wear cross irons on his legs, a punishment rarely inflicted in Newgate,
and probably one of the few cases of a recurrence, but under proper safeguards and limitations, to the old system of chains.
On another occasion Mr. Cope the governor came in and missed a man.
The ward was one short of its number. What had become of the fellow?
the fugitive, uncomfortably ensconced in the flue, came down of his own accord, like Colonel Colt's raccoon.
After this great iron guards, just as are to be seen in lunatic asylums,
were fixed over the fireplaces, and the prisoners had no longer access to the chimneys.
Among the escapes still remembered was one in 1849, accomplished by a man who had been employed
working at the roof of the chapel on the female side.
He was engaged in whitewashing and cleaning; the officer who had him in charge left him on the stairs leading to the gallery.
Taking advantage of being unobserved, he got out through the roof on to the leads, and traveled along them towards No. 1, Newgate Street.
This was a public-house.
He stepped in at a garret window, coolly walked downstairs, and entered the bar.
They asked him how he had cut his hand, which was bleeding, and he said he had done it while working up on the roof.
No further notice was taken of him; no one seemingly suspected that he was a prisoner, and he was suffered to walk off without let or hindrance.
In 1853 three men escaped in company from one of the wards in the middle yard.
They were penal servitude men, their names Bell, Brown, and Barry, and they were awaiting transfer to Leicester,
which with Wakefield was utilized as a receptacle for convicts not going to Western Australia,
or any of the new establishments at home, at Portland, Dartmoor, or elsewhere.
These men managed to cut a hole in the ceiling of the ward near the iron cage on the landing, and so got access to the roof.
At that time rope mats were still used as beds.
One of the three, shamming ill, remained all day in his ward, where he employed himself unraveling the rope from the sleeping-mats.
By evening he manufactured a good long length,
and after all was quiet the three got on to the roof through the hole, and so on to Tyler's manufactory close by,
whence they let themselves down into the street by the rope.
These men were all in prison dress at the time of their escape, but one of their number, Bell, sent back his clothes a few days later by parcel's delivery,
with a civil note to the governor, saying he had no further use for them. All three fugitives were recaptured,
Brown almost at once; then Barry, who was taken at the East End in a public-house where he had arranged to meet a pal.
The Newgate officers obtained information of this, and went to the spot, where they effected the capture,
but not till they had had an exciting chase down the street.
The third, Bell, remained longest at large. He too was run into at a lodging in the Kingsland Road.
The officers dropped on to him while he was still in bed, but as they came upstairs he jumped up and hid in a cupboard.
All three after recapture passed on, as originally intended, to Leicester, where they did their "bit" and were released;
but only to be taken soon afterwards for a fresh offense, and again pass through Newgate with sentences of penal servitude.
A later case was still more remarkable, as it was effected after the alteration of the prison and its reconstruction on the newest lines.
A sailor, Krapps by name, occupied one of the upper cells in the new block.
The doors, through incomplete knowledge of prison needs, were not, as now, sheeted with iron.
The prisoner had nothing to deal with but wooden panels, and by dint of cutting and chopping he got both the lower panels out.
Through the aperture he crept out on to the landing at the dead of night, and so down into the central space of the building.
Under superior orders all the doors and gates of this block were left open at night, to allow the night watchman to pass freely to all parts.
This was considered safer than intrusting him with keys.
Krapps walked at once into the yard and across to the female side, where he found some of the washing still hanging out to dry.
He made a strong rope with several of the sheets; then, returning to the male yard,
got hold of the step ladder used in lighting the gas, and which under our more careful supervision would have been, as now-a-days, chained up.
Cutting the cord which fastened the two legs of the step ladder, he opened them out and made one long length;
with this, placed against the wall near the chevaux-de-frise, he made an escalade.
The top of the wall was gained without difficulty.
Along this Krapps crawled, and then dropped down on to the cook-house.
He now put in requisition the rope made of the sheets, and with its help lowered himself into the street.
Down below were market-carts waiting for daylight, and among them Krapps found a refuge and friends.
The first intimation of his escape was afforded by the police, who informed the prison authorities next day that a rope was hanging down from the cook-house roof.
Nothing more was heard of Krapps. The curious thing in his case was that his offense was a trifling one;
he was still untried, but would almost certainly have escaped with a minor penalty, say of three or four months' imprisonment.
There is, however, no explanation of the motives which prompt prisoners to attempt escapes.
Cases well authenticated have been known of men who had all but completed their sentences, and for whom the prison gates would open within a few days,
who yet faced extraordinary risks to advance their enlargement by only a few hours.
On the other hand, at the great convict establishments, such is the moral restraint of a systematic discipline,
that numbers of men, "lifers," and others with ten, fourteen, or twenty years to do, can be trusted to work out of doors without bolts and bars
at a distance from the prison.
The last escape from Newgate was only three years ago, and occurred just before the final closing of the prison.
No report of it was made public, as the man was almost immediately recaptured.
He was at work under the supervision of the artisan warder of the prison,
who permitted him to go up on to the roof of the old wards, in order to throw water for flushing purposes down a shoot.
He was out of sight while so employed, and remained so long absent that the warder, becoming uneasy, went in search of him.
He had disappeared.
Encouraged by the shouts and signals of some workmen employed on a building outside, the prisoner made one of the most marvellous jumps on record,
from the building he was on to a distant wall, with a drop of sixty feet between.
Then he ran along the coping of the wall towards its angle with Tyler's manufactory, and dropped down on to the gridiron below.
This was not strong enough to carry him, and he fell through.
Suicides and executions were, however, always the most effectual methods of making exit from durance.
Suicides at Newgate were numerous enough, but they seldom possessed any novel or unusual features;
prison suicides seldom do, except as regards ingenuity and determination.
Only great resolution indeed, persisted in to the bitter end,
would make death a certainty, so limited and imperfect are the means generally available.
When a bit of rope carefully secreted,
braces, shoe-strings, shirt torn into strips are the only instruments, and a bar or small hook
at no elevation affords the only drop, strangulation would seldom supervene but for the resolution of the miserable felo de se.
One curious instance of a suicide carried out under the most adverse and extraordinary circumstances may be quoted.
It was that of a "Long Firm" swindler, by name Johnson,
who contrived to hang himself from a hammock hook only eighteen inches from the ground.
The noose was one of his hammock straps, which he buckled round his throat.
Having carefully spread out a blanket on the floor just below the hammock as it lay suspended,
he fastened one end of the strap above mentioned to the hook, and then fell down.
He might have saved himself at any moment by merely extending an arm; but he lay there patiently till death supervened.
When discovered next morning, quite dead, it was found that the strap actually did not touch his throat;
three fingers might have been inserted between it and the flesh; the pressure was all on the arteries behind the ears,
and surgical opinion stated that the stoppage of circulation was the cause of death.
Probably dissolution came as easily and almost without pain.
A laudable desire to invest executions with more and more solemnity and decorum gained ground as they became more rare.
As more humane principles were introduced into prison management,
greater attention was paid to the capital convicts, and the horrors of their situation while awaiting sentence
were as far as possible mitigated and toned down. But there was little improvement in the ceremony itself.
There were still untoward accidents occasionally at executions, and even the chief practitioner of recent times, Calcraft,
was not always to be trusted to do his fell work efficiently.
Having mentioned Calcraft's name,
I may be permitted to digress for a moment to give a few particulars concerning the last officially appointed hangman of the city of London.
After Calcraft's resignation no successor was really appointed.
Marwood, whose name is so familiar with the present generation,
had no official status, and was merely an operator selected by the Corporation, and who, on the strength of it,
contracted with sheriffs and conveners to work by the job.
But Calcraft regularly succeeded Foxen, who followed Botting, and Dennis, the actor in the 1780 riots.
Calcraft was born at Baddow, in Essex, in 1800;
he was a shoemaker by trade, and settled in London after his marriage in 1825.
The story goes, that about 1828
his attention was drawn early one morning to a man who leant against a lamp-post in Finsbury Square, coughing violently.
Calcraft, who, in spite of the dreadful calling he subsequently followed, was always reputed a kindly man,
invited the man with the cough to enter a neighboring house and try a little peppermint for it.
The other accepted, and they got into conversation.
He told Calcraft that he was Foxen the executioner, and that he was that moment on his way to Newgate to hang a man,
but that his cough was getting so much the master of him that he feared he would not be able to carry on his duties much longer.
I have no idea who the sheriffs will get to do the work after me," said Foxen, adding that his assistant, Tom Cheshire,|"I have no idea who the sheriffs will get to do the work after me," said Foxen, adding that his assistant, Tom Cheshire, LJ016-0191|was given to drink, and not to be trusted.|was given to drink, and not to be trusted. LJ016-0192|"I think I could do that sort of job," said Calcraft, on the spur of the moment.|"I think I could do that sort of job," said Calcraft, on the spur of the moment. LJ016-0193|Foxen asked him his name and address, and went away.|Foxen asked him his name and address, and went away. LJ016-0194|Calcraft thought no more of what had occurred till the next sessions at the Old Bailey, when the sheriffs sent for him,|Calcraft thought no more of what had occurred till the next sessions at the Old Bailey, when the sheriffs sent for him, LJ016-0195|and offered him the post of executioner for the city of London and Middlesex.|and offered him the post of executioner for the city of London and Middlesex. LJ016-0196|He accepted, having at first Tom Cheshire as his assistant, then for a time, when Cheshire was dismissed for drunkenness, a man named Osborne.|He accepted, having at first Tom Cheshire as his assistant, then for a time, when Cheshire was dismissed for drunkenness, a man named Osborne. LJ016-0197|After that he worked alone.|After that he worked alone. LJ016-0198|I cannot find that Calcraft was sworn in when appointed, or any exact information when the old forbidding ceremony ceased to be practiced.|I cannot find that Calcraft was sworn in when appointed, or any exact information when the old forbidding ceremony ceased to be practiced. LJ016-0199|It was customary to make the executioner take the Bible in his hand, and swear solemnly that he would dispatch every criminal condemned to die,|It was customary to make the executioner take the Bible in his hand, and swear solemnly that he would dispatch every criminal condemned to die, LJ016-0200|without favoring father or mother or any other relation or friend.|without favoring father or mother or any other relation or friend. LJ016-0201|When he had taken the oath he was dismissed with the words, "Get thee hence, wretch!
Calcraft's emoluments were a guinea per week, and an extra guinea for every execution.
He got besides half-a-crown for every man he flogged, and an allowance to provide cats or birch rods.
For acting as executioner of Horsemonger Lane Jail
he received a retaining fee of £5, 5 shillings, with the usual guinea for each job;
he was also at liberty to engage himself in the country, where he demanded and was paid £10 on each occasion.
It was not always easy to get a hangman so cheap, as I have already indicated on a previous page.
The onus and responsibility of carrying out the sentence is personal to the sheriff. A good story is told illustrating this.
Some wags in Scotland seized Calcraft and kept him in durance the night before the execution.
Meanwhile the convener or sheriff was in despair, expecting that, failing the executioner, he would have to do the job himself.
But, fortunately for him, just at the last moment Calcraft was set free.
Calcraft's salary was more than the proverbial "thirteenpence halfpenny -- hangman's wages."
The origin of this expression dates, it is said, from the time when the Scottish mark,
a silver coin bearing the same relation to the Scottish pound that an English shilling does to an English pound, was made to pass current in England.
The mark was valued at thirteenpence halfpenny, or rather more than the shilling, which from time immemorial had been the hangman's wages.
That very ancient perquisite the convict's clothes was never claimed by Calcraft, and it may be doubted whether he was entitled to it.
On one particular occasion, however, he got them. A gentleman whose sins brought him to the gallows at Maidstone
wished to do Calcraft a good turn, and sent to his London tailor for a complete new suit, in which he appeared at his execution.
He expressly bequeathed them to Calcraft, who was graciously pleased to accept them.
On another occasion an importunate person begged Calcraft eagerly to claim his right to the clothes, and give them to him.
Calcraft consented, got and bestowed the clothes, only to find that the person he had obliged exhibited them publicly.
It may be added that of late years the clothes in which a convict has suffered are invariably burnt.
Capital convicts go to the gallows in their own clothing, and not in prison dress, unless the former is quite unfit to be worn.
Calcraft shared the odium which his office, not strangely, has always inspired. But he was admitted into the jail,
which his predecessors were not, and who were paid their wages over the gate to obviate the necessity for letting them enter.
To this curious etiquette was due the appointment of an official whose office has long since disappeared, "the yeoman of the halter,"
whose business it was to provide the rope and do the pinioning, and who was paid a fee of five shillings.
They did not dislike Calcraft, however, at Newgate. He was an illiterate, simple-minded man, who scarcely remembered what executions he had performed.
He kept no record of them, and when asked questions, referred to the officers of the jail.
His nature must have been kindly.
When he came to the prison for his wages his grandchildren often accompanied him, affectionately clinging to his hands;
and he owned a pet pony which would follow him about like a dog.
In his own profession
he was not unskilful, but he proceeded entirely by rule of thumb, leaving the result very much to chance and the strength of the rope.
He was so much in favor of short drops that his immediate successor, Marwood, stigmatized him as "short-drop" man.
Marwood being, on the other hand, in favor of giving a man as much rope as possible.
With Calcraft's method there were undoubtedly many failures, and it was a common custom for him to go below the gallows
just to steady their legs a little;" in other words, to add his weight to that of the hanging bodies.|"just to steady their legs a little;" in other words, to add his weight to that of the hanging bodies. LJ016-0239|Marwood till latterly seemed to have done his work more effectually, and has been known to give as much as six feet fall.|Marwood till latterly seemed to have done his work more effectually, and has been known to give as much as six feet fall. LJ016-0240|This generally produces instantaneous death, although cases where complete fracture of the spinal cord occurred are said to be rare.|This generally produces instantaneous death, although cases where complete fracture of the spinal cord occurred are said to be rare. LJ016-0241|Calcraft served the city of London till 1874, when he was pensioned at the rate of twenty-five shillings per week.|Calcraft served the city of London till eighteen seventy-four, when he was pensioned at the rate of twenty-five shillings per week. LJ016-0242|The last execution at which he acted was that of Godwin, on the 25th May, 1874.|The last execution at which he acted was that of Godwin, on the twenty-fifth May, eighteen seventy-four. LJ016-0243|Marwood, who succeeded him, and who died while these sheets were in the press, was a Lincolnshire man, a native of Horncastle,|Marwood, who succeeded him, and who died while these sheets were in the press, was a Lincolnshire man, a native of Horncastle, LJ016-0244|who first took to the work from predilection, and the idea of being useful in his generation, as he himself assured the writer of these pages.|who first took to the work from predilection, and the idea of being useful in his generation, as he himself assured the writer of these pages. LJ016-0245|Until the time of his death he kept a small shop close to the church in Horncastle.|Until the time of his death he kept a small shop close to the church in Horncastle. LJ016-0246|Over the door, in gilt letters, were the words "Crown Office"; in the window was a pile of official envelopes, ostentatiously displayed,|Over the door, in gilt letters, were the words "Crown Office"; in the window was a pile of official envelopes, ostentatiously displayed, LJ016-0247|while round about were shoe-strings, boot-laces, and lasts. Marwood, strange to say, followed the same trade as Calcraft.|while round about were shoe-strings, boot-laces, and lasts. Marwood, strange to say, followed the same trade as Calcraft. LJ016-0248|Marwood was proud of his calling, and when questioned as to whether his process was satisfactory, replied that he heard "no complaints.
The strange competition amongst hundreds to succeed Marwood is a strange fact too recently before the public to need mention here.
It may, however, be remarked that the wisdom of appointing any regular hangman is very open to question,
and must be strongly deprecated on moral grounds, as tending to the utter degradation of one individual.
Possibly such changes may be introduced into the method of execution
that the ceremony may be made more mechanical, thus rendering the personal intervention of a skilled functionary unnecessary.
Executions long continued to be in public, in spite of remonstrance and reprobation.
The old prejudices, such as that which enlisted Dr. Johnson on the side of the Tyburn procession, still lingered and prevented any change.
It was thought that capital punishment would lose its deterrent effect if it ceased to be public,
and the raison d'être of the penalty, which in principle so many opposed, would be gone.
This line of argument prevailed over the manifest horrors of the spectacle. These increased as time passed.
The graphic and terrible account given by Charles Dickens of the awful scene before Horsemonger Lane Jail, at the execution of the Mannings,
has already been quoted. Again, the concourse of people collected in front of Newgate to witness the execution,
simultaneously, of the five pirates, part of the mutinous crew of the 'Flowery Land,' was greater than on any previous occasion.
It was a callous, careless crowd of coarse-minded, semi-brutalized folk, who came to enjoy themselves.
Few, if any, showed any feeling of terror, none were impressed with the solemnity, or realized the warning which the sight conveyed.
The upturned faces of the eager spectators resembled those of the 'gods' at Drury Lane on Boxing Night;
the crowd had come to witness a popular and gratuitous public performance -- better than a prize-fight or a play.
No notion that they were assisting at a vindication of the law filled the minds of those present with dread.
On the contrary, the prevailing sentiment was one of satisfaction at the success of the spectacle.
The remarks heard amongst the crowd were of coarse approval.
The reply evinced equal satisfaction, and the speaker, with a profane oath, declared that he would like to act as Jack Ketch to the whole lot.
To the disgrace of the better-educated and better-bred public, executions could still command the attendance of curious aristocrats from the West End.
At Müller's execution there was great competition for front seats,
and the windows of the opposite houses, which commanded a good view, as usual fetched high prices.
As much as £25 was paid for a first-floor front on this occasion.
Never, indeed, had an execution been more generally patronized.
This is proved by contemporary accounts, especially one graphic and realistic article which appeared in the 'Times,'
and which contributed in no small degree to the introduction of private executions. A great crowd was expected, and a great crowd came.
They collected over night in the bright light of a November moon.
There were well-dressed and ill-dressed, old men and lads, women and girls.
Rain fell heavily at intervals, but did not thin the concourse.
Till three o'clock it was one long revelry of songs and laughter, shouting, and often quarreling, though,|"Till three o'clock it was one long revelry of songs and laughter, shouting, and often quarreling, though, LJ016-0283|to do them mere justice, there was at least till then a half-drunken ribald gaiety among the crowd that made them all akin.
There were preachers among the crowd, but they could not get a patient hearing.
Then one struck up the hymn of the Promised Land, and the refrain was at once taken up with a mighty chorus --
Oh, my! Think I've got to die.
This was presently superseded by a fresh catch --
Müller, Müller, He's the man," till a diversion was created by the appearance of the gallows, which was received with continuous yells.|"Müller, Müller, He's the man," till a diversion was created by the appearance of the gallows, which was received with continuous yells. LJ016-0289|As day broke the character of the crowd was betrayed.|As day broke the character of the crowd was betrayed. LJ016-0290|There were but few women, except of the most degraded sort; the men were mostly young men --|There were but few women, except of the most degraded sort; the men were mostly young men -- LJ016-0291|sharpers, thieves, gamblers, betting men, the outsiders of the boxing ring,|sharpers, thieves, gamblers, betting men, the outsiders of the boxing ring, LJ016-0292|bricklayers' laborers, dock workmen, German artisans and sugar-bakers|bricklayers' laborers, dock workmen, German artisans and sugar-bakers LJ016-0293|with the rakings of cheap singing-halls and billiard-rooms, the fast young men of London.|with the rakings of cheap singing-halls and billiard-rooms, the fast young men of London. LJ016-0294|But all, whether young or old, men or women, seemed to know nothing, feel nothing, to have no object but the gallows, and to laugh,|But all, whether young or old, men or women, seemed to know nothing, feel nothing, to have no object but the gallows, and to laugh, LJ016-0295|curse, or shout, as in this heaving and struggling forward they gained or lost in their strong efforts to get nearer where Müller was to die.|curse, or shout, as in this heaving and struggling forward they gained or lost in their strong efforts to get nearer where Müller was to die. LJ016-0296|The actual execution made some impression.|The actual execution made some impression. LJ016-0297|The crowd was for a moment awed and stilled by the quiet rapid passage from life to death!|The crowd was for a moment awed and stilled by the quiet rapid passage from life to death! LJ016-0298|But before "the slight slow vibrations of the body had well ended,|But before "the slight slow vibrations of the body had well ended, LJ016-0299|robbery and violence, loud laughing, oaths, fighting, obscene conduct, and still more filthy language reigned round the gallows far and near.|robbery and violence, loud laughing, oaths, fighting, obscene conduct, and still more filthy language reigned round the gallows far and near. LJ016-0300|Such too the scene remained with little change or respite till the old hangman (Calcraft) slunk again along the drop,|Such too the scene remained with little change or respite till the old hangman (Calcraft) slunk again along the drop, LJ016-0301|amid hisses and sneering inquiries of what he had had to drink that morning.|amid hisses and sneering inquiries of what he had had to drink that morning. LJ016-0302|He, after failing once to cut the rope, made a second attempt more successfully, and the body of Müller disappeared from view.|He, after failing once to cut the rope, made a second attempt more successfully, and the body of Müller disappeared from view. LJ016-0303|It was preposterous to claim for such a scene as this that it conveyed any great moral lesson, or had any deterring influence.|It was preposterous to claim for such a scene as this that it conveyed any great moral lesson, or had any deterring influence. LJ016-0304|Numbers of humane and thoughtful persons had long been convinced of this.|Numbers of humane and thoughtful persons had long been convinced of this. LJ016-0305|Already the urgent necessity for abolishing public executions had been brought before the House of Commons by Mr. Hibbert,|Already the urgent necessity for abolishing public executions had been brought before the House of Commons by Mr. Hibbert, LJ016-0306|and the question, as part of the whole subject of capital punishment, had been referred to a royal commission in January 1864.|and the question, as part of the whole subject of capital punishment, had been referred to a royal commission in January eighteen sixty-four. LJ016-0307|Full evidence was taken on all points, and on that regarding public executions there was a great preponderance of opinion towards their abolition,|Full evidence was taken on all points, and on that regarding public executions there was a great preponderance of opinion towards their abolition, LJ016-0308|yet the witnesses were not unanimous.|yet the witnesses were not unanimous. LJ016-0309|Some of the judges would have retained the public spectacle; the ordinary of Newgate was not certain that public executions were not the best.|Some of the judges would have retained the public spectacle; the ordinary of Newgate was not certain that public executions were not the best. LJ016-0310|Another distinguished witness feared|Another distinguished witness feared LJ016-0311|that any secrecy in the treatment of the condemned would invest them with a new and greater interest, which was much to be deprecated.|that any secrecy in the treatment of the condemned would invest them with a new and greater interest, which was much to be deprecated. LJ016-0312|Foreign witnesses, too, were in favor of publicity.|Foreign witnesses, too, were in favor of publicity. LJ016-0313|On the other hand, Lords Cranworth and Wensleydale recommended private executions; so did Mr. Spencer Walpole, M.P.|On the other hand, Lords Cranworth and Wensleydale recommended private executions; so did Mr. Spencer Walpole, M.P. LJ016-0314|Sir George Grey thought there was a growing feeling in favor of executions within the prison precincts.|Sir George Grey thought there was a growing feeling in favor of executions within the prison precincts. LJ016-0315|Colonel (now Sir Edmund) Henderson was strongly in favor of them,|Colonel (now Sir Edmund) Henderson was strongly in favor of them, LJ016-0316|based on his experience of them in Western Australia. He not only thought them likely to be more deterrent,|based on his experience of them in Western Australia. He not only thought them likely to be more deterrent, LJ016-0317|but believed that a public ceremony destroyed the whole value of an execution.|but believed that a public ceremony destroyed the whole value of an execution. LJ016-0318|Other officials, great lawyers, governors of prisons, and chaplains supported this view.|Other officials, great lawyers, governors of prisons, and chaplains supported this view. LJ016-0319|The only doubts expressed were as to the sufficiency of the safeguards, as to the certainty of death and its subsequent publication.|The only doubts expressed were as to the sufficiency of the safeguards, as to the certainty of death and its subsequent publication. LJ016-0320|But these, it was thought, might be provided by the admission of the press and the holding of a coroner's inquest.|But these, it was thought, might be provided by the admission of the press and the holding of a coroner's inquest. LJ016-0321|Duly impressed with the weight of evidence in favor of abolition,|Duly impressed with the weight of evidence in favor of abolition, LJ016-0322|the commission recommended that death sentences should be carried out within the jail, under such regulations as might be considered necessary|the commission recommended that death sentences should be carried out within the jail, under such regulations as might be considered necessary LJ016-0323|to prevent abuse, and satisfy the public that the law had been complied with.|to prevent abuse, and satisfy the public that the law had been complied with. LJ016-0324|But it is curious to note that there were several dissentients among the commissioners to this paragraph of the report.|But it is curious to note that there were several dissentients among the commissioners to this paragraph of the report. LJ016-0325|The judge of the Admiralty Court, the Right Hon. Stephen Lushington, the Right Hon. James Moncrieff,|The judge of the Admiralty Court, the Right Hon. Stephen Lushington, the Right Hon. James Moncrieff, LJ016-0326|Lord Advocate, Mr. Charles Neate, Mr. William Ewart, and last, but not least, Mr. John Bright|Lord Advocate, Mr. Charles Neate, Mr. William Ewart, and last, but not least, Mr. John Bright LJ016-0327|declared that they were not prepared to agree to the resolution respecting private executions.|declared that they were not prepared to agree to the resolution respecting private executions. LJ016-0328|Nevertheless, in the very next session|Nevertheless, in the very next session LJ016-0329|a bill was introduced by Mr. Hibbert, M.P., and accepted by the Government, providing for the future carrying out of executions within prisons.|a bill was introduced by Mr. Hibbert, M.P., and accepted by the Government, providing for the future carrying out of executions within prisons. LJ016-0330|It was read for the first time in March 1866, but did not become law till 1868.|It was read for the first time in March eighteen sixty-six, but did not become law till eighteen sixty-eight. LJ016-0331|The last public execution in front of Newgate was that of the Fenian Michael Barrett,|The last public execution in front of Newgate was that of the Fenian Michael Barrett, LJ016-0332|who was convicted of complicity in the Clerkenwell explosion, intended to effect the release of Burke and Casey|who was convicted of complicity in the Clerkenwell explosion, intended to effect the release of Burke and Casey LJ016-0333|from Clerkenwell prison, by which many persons lost their lives.|from Clerkenwell prison, by which many persons lost their lives. LJ016-0334|Unusual precautions were taken upon this occasion, as some fresh outrage was apprehended.|Unusual precautions were taken upon this occasion, as some fresh outrage was apprehended. LJ016-0335|There was no interference with the crowd, which collected as usual, although not to the customary extent.|There was no interference with the crowd, which collected as usual, although not to the customary extent. LJ016-0336|But Newgate and its neighborhood was carefully held by the police, both city and metropolitan.|But Newgate and its neighborhood was carefully held by the police, both city and metropolitan. LJ016-0337|In the houses opposite the prison numbers of detectives mixed with the spectators;|In the houses opposite the prison numbers of detectives mixed with the spectators; LJ016-0338|inside the jail was Colonel Frazer, the chief commissioner of the city police, and at no great distance, although in the background,|inside the jail was Colonel Frazer, the chief commissioner of the city police, and at no great distance, although in the background, LJ016-0339|troops were held in readiness to act if required. Everything passed off quite quietly, however,|troops were held in readiness to act if required. Everything passed off quite quietly, however, LJ016-0340|and Calcraft, who had been threatened with summary retribution if he executed Barrett, carried out the sentence without mishap.|and Calcraft, who had been threatened with summary retribution if he executed Barrett, carried out the sentence without mishap. LJ016-0341|The sufferer was stolid and reticent to the last.|The sufferer was stolid and reticent to the last. LJ016-0342|The first private execution under the new law took place within the precincts of Maidstone Jail.|The first private execution under the new law took place within the precincts of Maidstone Jail. LJ016-0343|The sufferer was a porter on the London, Chatham, and Dover railway, sentenced to death for shooting the station-master at Dover.|The sufferer was a porter on the London, Chatham, and Dover railway, sentenced to death for shooting the station-master at Dover. LJ016-0344|The ceremony, which was witnessed by only a few officials and representatives of the press, was performed with the utmost decency and decorum.|The ceremony, which was witnessed by only a few officials and representatives of the press, was performed with the utmost decency and decorum. LJ016-0346|a fact duly advertised as completed by the hoisting of the black flag over the jail,|a fact duly advertised as completed by the hoisting of the black flag over the jail, LJ016-0347|had undoubtedly a solemn, impressive effect upon those outside.|had undoubtedly a solemn, impressive effect upon those outside. LJ016-0348|The same was realized in the first private execution within Newgate,|The same was realized in the first private execution within Newgate, LJ016-0349|that of Alexander Mackay, who murdered his mistress at Norton Folgate by beating her with a rolling-pin and furnace-rake,|that of Alexander Mackay, who murdered his mistress at Norton Folgate by beating her with a rolling-pin and furnace-rake, LJ016-0350|and who expiated his crime on the 8th September, 1868.|and who expiated his crime on the eighth September, eighteen sixty-eight. LJ016-0351|A more marked change from the old scene can hardly be conceived. Instead of the roar of the brutalized crowd,|A more marked change from the old scene can hardly be conceived. Instead of the roar of the brutalized crowd, LJ016-0352|the officials spoke in whispers; there was but little moving to and fro.|the officials spoke in whispers; there was but little moving to and fro. LJ016-0353|Almost absolute silence prevailed until the great bell began to toll its deep note, and broke the stillness with its regular and monotonous clangour,|Almost absolute silence prevailed until the great bell began to toll its deep note, and broke the stillness with its regular and monotonous clangour, LJ016-0354|and the ordinary, in a voice trembling with emotion, read the burial service aloud.|and the ordinary, in a voice trembling with emotion, read the burial service aloud. LJ016-0355|Mackay's fortitude, which had been great,|Mackay's fortitude, which had been great, LJ016-0356|broke down at the supreme moment before the horror of the stillness, the awful impressiveness of the scene in which he was the principal actor.|broke down at the supreme moment before the horror of the stillness, the awful impressiveness of the scene in which he was the principal actor. LJ016-0357|No time was lost in carrying out the dread ceremony; but it was not completed without some of the officials turning sick, and the moment it was over,|No time was lost in carrying out the dread ceremony; but it was not completed without some of the officials turning sick, and the moment it was over, LJ016-0358|all who could were glad to escape from the last act of the ghastly drama at which they had assisted.|all who could were glad to escape from the last act of the ghastly drama at which they had assisted. LJ016-0359|Private executions at their first introduction were not popular with the Newgate officials, and for intelligible reasons.|Private executions at their first introduction were not popular with the Newgate officials, and for intelligible reasons. LJ016-0360|The change added greatly to the responsibilities of the governor and his subordinates. Hitherto the public had seemed to assist at the ceremony;|The change added greatly to the responsibilities of the governor and his subordinates. Hitherto the public had seemed to assist at the ceremony; LJ016-0361|the moment too that the condemned man had passed through the debtors' door on to the scaffold the prison had done with him,|the moment too that the condemned man had passed through the debtors' door on to the scaffold the prison had done with him, LJ016-0362|and the great outside world shared in the completion of the sacrifice.|and the great outside world shared in the completion of the sacrifice. LJ016-0363|This feeling was the stronger because|This feeling was the stronger because LJ016-0364|all the ghastly paraphernalia, the gallows itself and the process of erecting and removing it, rested with the city architect, and not with the prison officials.|all the ghastly paraphernalia, the gallows itself and the process of erecting and removing it, rested with the city architect, and not with the prison officials. LJ016-0365|Moreover, after the execution, under the old system, the latter had only to receive the body for burial after it had been cut down by the hangman,|Moreover, after the execution, under the old system, the latter had only to receive the body for burial after it had been cut down by the hangman, LJ016-0366|and placed decently in a shell by the workmen who removed the gallows.|and placed decently in a shell by the workmen who removed the gallows. LJ016-0367|Under the new system the whole of the arrangements from first to last fell upon the officers.|Under the new system the whole of the arrangements from first to last fell upon the officers. LJ016-0368|It was they who formed the chief part of the small select group of spectators;|It was they who formed the chief part of the small select group of spectators; LJ016-0369|upon them devolved the painful duty of cutting down the body and preparing for the inquest.|upon them devolved the painful duty of cutting down the body and preparing for the inquest. LJ016-0370|All that the hangman, whoever he may be, does under the new regime is to unhook the halter and remove the pinioning straps.|All that the hangman, whoever he may be, does under the new regime is to unhook the halter and remove the pinioning straps. LJ016-0371|The interment in a shell filled with quicklime in the passage-way leading to the Old Bailey is also a part of the duty of the prison officials.|The interment in a shell filled with quicklime in the passage-way leading to the Old Bailey is also a part of the duty of the prison officials. LJ016-0373|and for the greater security of prisoners it is roofed in with iron bars which gives it, at least overhead, the aspect of a huge cage.|and for the greater security of prisoners it is roofed in with iron bars which gives it, at least overhead, the aspect of a huge cage. LJ016-0374|Underfoot and upon the walls roughly cut into the stones, are single initial letters, the brief epitaphs of those who lie below.|Underfoot and upon the walls roughly cut into the stones, are single initial letters, the brief epitaphs of those who lie below. LJ016-0375|As this burial-ground leads to the adjacent Central Criminal Court, accused murderers, on going to and returning from trial,|As this burial-ground leads to the adjacent Central Criminal Court, accused murderers, on going to and returning from trial, LJ016-0376|literally walked over what, in case of conviction, would be their own graves.|literally walked over what, in case of conviction, would be their own graves. LJ016-0377|The older officers, with several of whom I have conversed, have thus had unusual opportunities of watching the demeanor of murderers both before trial|The older officers, with several of whom I have conversed, have thus had unusual opportunities of watching the demeanor of murderers both before trial LJ016-0378|and after sentence.|and after sentence. LJ016-0379|All as a rule, unless poignant remorse has brought a desire to court their richly-merited retribution, are buoyed up|All as a rule, unless poignant remorse has brought a desire to court their richly-merited retribution, are buoyed up LJ016-0380|with hope to the last. There is always the chance of a flaw in the indictment, of a missing witness, or extenuating circumstances.|with hope to the last. There is always the chance of a flaw in the indictment, of a missing witness, or extenuating circumstances. LJ016-0381|Even when in the condemned cell, with a shameful death within measurable distance,|Even when in the condemned cell, with a shameful death within measurable distance, LJ016-0382|many cling still to life, expecting much from the intercession of friends or the humanitarianism of the age.|many cling still to life, expecting much from the intercession of friends or the humanitarianism of the age. LJ016-0383|All almost without exception sleep soundly at night, except the first after sentence,|All almost without exception sleep soundly at night, except the first after sentence, LJ016-0384|when the first shock of the verdict and the solemn notification of the impending blow keeps nearly all awake, or at least disturbs their night's rest.|when the first shock of the verdict and the solemn notification of the impending blow keeps nearly all awake, or at least disturbs their night's rest. LJ016-0385|But the uneasiness soon wears off. The second night sleep comes readily, and is sound;|But the uneasiness soon wears off. The second night sleep comes readily, and is sound; LJ016-0386|many of the most abandoned murderers snore peacefully their eight hours, even on the night immediately preceding execution.|many of the most abandoned murderers snore peacefully their eight hours, even on the night immediately preceding execution. LJ016-0387|All too have a fairly good appetite, and eat with relish, up to the last moment.|All too have a fairly good appetite, and eat with relish, up to the last moment. LJ016-0388|A few go further, and are almost gluttonous.|A few go further, and are almost gluttonous. LJ016-0389|Giovanni Lanni, the Italian boy who murdered a Frenchwoman in the Haymarket,|Giovanni Lanni, the Italian boy who murdered a Frenchwoman in the Haymarket, LJ016-0390|and was arrested on board ship just as he was about to leave the country, had a little spare cash, which he devoted entirely to the purchase of extra food.|and was arrested on board ship just as he was about to leave the country, had a little spare cash, which he devoted entirely to the purchase of extra food. LJ016-0391|He ate constantly and voraciously after sentence, as though eager to cram as many meals as possible into the few hours still left him to live.|He ate constantly and voraciously after sentence, as though eager to cram as many meals as possible into the few hours still left him to live. LJ016-0392|Jeffrey, who murdered his own child, an infant of six, by hanging him in a cellar in Seven Dials,|Jeffrey, who murdered his own child, an infant of six, by hanging him in a cellar in Seven Dials, LJ016-0393|called for a roast duck directly he entered the condemned cell.|called for a roast duck directly he entered the condemned cell. LJ016-0394|The request was not granted, as the old custom of allowing capital convicts whatever they asked for in the way of food has not been the rule in Newgate.|The request was not granted, as the old custom of allowing capital convicts whatever they asked for in the way of food has not been the rule in Newgate. LJ016-0395|The diet of the condemned is the ordinary diet of the prison,|The diet of the condemned is the ordinary diet of the prison, LJ016-0396|but to which additions are sometimes made, chiefly of stimulants, if deemed necessary, by the medical officer of the jail.|but to which additions are sometimes made, chiefly of stimulants, if deemed necessary, by the medical officer of the jail. LJ016-0397|The craving for tobacco which so dominates the habitual smoker often leads the convicted to plead hard for a last smoke.|The craving for tobacco which so dominates the habitual smoker often leads the convicted to plead hard for a last smoke. LJ016-0398|As a special favor|As a special favor LJ016-0399|Wainwright was allowed a cigar the night before execution, which he smoked in the prison yard, walking up and down with the governor, Mr. Sydney Smith.|Wainwright was allowed a cigar the night before execution, which he smoked in the prison yard, walking up and down with the governor, Mr. Sydney Smith. LJ016-0400|Wainwright's demeanor was one of reckless effrontery steadily maintained to the last.|Wainwright's demeanor was one of reckless effrontery steadily maintained to the last. LJ016-0401|His conversation turned always upon his influence over the weaker sex, and the extraordinary success he had achieved.|His conversation turned always upon his influence over the weaker sex, and the extraordinary success he had achieved. LJ016-0402|No woman could resist him, he calmly assured Mr. Smith that night as they walked together, and he recounted his villanies one by one.|No woman could resist him, he calmly assured Mr. Smith that night as they walked together, and he recounted his villanies one by one. LJ016-0403|His effrontery was only outdone by his cool contempt for the consolations of religion.|His effrontery was only outdone by his cool contempt for the consolations of religion. LJ016-0404|The man who had made a pious life a cloak for his misdeeds, the once exemplary young man and indefatigable Sunday School teacher,|The man who had made a pious life a cloak for his misdeeds, the once exemplary young man and indefatigable Sunday School teacher, LJ016-0405|went impenitent to the gallows. The only sign of feeling he showed was in asking to be allowed to choose the hymns on the Sunday|went impenitent to the gallows. The only sign of feeling he showed was in asking to be allowed to choose the hymns on the Sunday LJ016-0406|the condemned sermon was preached in the prison chapel, and this was probably only that he might hear the singing of a lady with a magnificent voice|the condemned sermon was preached in the prison chapel, and this was probably only that he might hear the singing of a lady with a magnificent voice LJ016-0407|who generally attended the prison services.|who generally attended the prison services. LJ016-0408|During the singing of these hymns Wainwright fainted, but whether from real emotion or the desire to make a sensation was never exactly known.|During the singing of these hymns Wainwright fainted, but whether from real emotion or the desire to make a sensation was never exactly known. LJ016-0409|On the fatal morning he came gaily out of his cell,|On the fatal morning he came gaily out of his cell, LJ016-0410|nodded pleasantly to the governor, who stood just opposite, and then walked briskly towards the execution shed, smiling as he went along.|nodded pleasantly to the governor, who stood just opposite, and then walked briskly towards the execution shed, smiling as he went along. LJ016-0411|There was a smile on his face when it was last seen, and just as the terrible white cap was drawn over it.|There was a smile on his face when it was last seen, and just as the terrible white cap was drawn over it. LJ016-0412|Wainwright's execution was within the jail, but only nominally private.|Wainwright's execution was within the jail, but only nominally private. LJ016-0413|No less than sixty-seven persons were present, admitted by special permission of the sheriff.|No less than sixty-seven persons were present, admitted by special permission of the sheriff. LJ016-0414|Rumour even went so far as to assert that among the spectators were several women, disguised in male habiliments;|Rumour even went so far as to assert that among the spectators were several women, disguised in male habiliments; LJ016-0415|but the story was never substantiated, and we may hope that it rested only on the idle gossip of the day.|but the story was never substantiated, and we may hope that it rested only on the idle gossip of the day. LJ016-0416|Many, like Wainwright, were calm and imperturbable throughout their trying ordeal.|Many, like Wainwright, were calm and imperturbable throughout their trying ordeal. LJ016-0417|Catherine Wilson, the poisoner, was reserved and reticent to the last, expressing no contrition, but also no fear --|Catherine Wilson, the poisoner, was reserved and reticent to the last, expressing no contrition, but also no fear -- LJ016-0418|a tall, gaunt, repulsive-looking woman, who no more shrank from cowardly, secret crimes than from the penalty they entailed.|a tall, gaunt, repulsive-looking woman, who no more shrank from cowardly, secret crimes than from the penalty they entailed. LJ016-0419|Kate Webster, who was tried at the Central Criminal Court, and passed through Newgate, although she suffered at Wandsworth,|Kate Webster, who was tried at the Central Criminal Court, and passed through Newgate, although she suffered at Wandsworth, LJ016-0420|is remembered at the former prison as a defiant,|is remembered at the former prison as a defiant, LJ016-0421|brutal creature who showed no remorse, but was subject to fits of ungovernable passion, when she broke out into language the most appalling.|brutal creature who showed no remorse, but was subject to fits of ungovernable passion, when she broke out into language the most appalling. LJ016-0422|The man Marley displayed fortitude of a less repulsive kind. He acknowledged his guilt from the first.|The man Marley displayed fortitude of a less repulsive kind. He acknowledged his guilt from the first. LJ016-0423|When the sheriff offered him counsel for his defense, he declined, saying he wished to make none -- "the witnesses for the prosecution spoke the truth.
During the trial and after sentence he remained perfectly cool and collected.
When visited one day in the condemned cell, just as St. Sepulchre's clock was striking, he looked up and said laughingly, "Go along, clock;
come along, gallows.
He tripped up the chapel-stairs to hear the condemned sermon, and came out with cheerful alacrity on the morning he was to die.
Some condemned convicts converse but little with the warders who have them unceasingly in charge.
Others talk freely enough on various topics, but principally upon their own cases.
When vanity is strongly developed there is the keen anxiety to hear what is being said about them outside.
One was vexed to think that his victims had a finer funeral than he would have.
The only subject another showed any interest in was the theatres and the new pieces that were being produced. A third, Christian Satler,
laughed and jested with the officers about "Jack Ketch," who, through the postponement of the execution, would lose his Christmas dinner.
When they brought in the two watchers to relieve guard one night, Sattler said,
Two fresh men! May I speak to them? Yes! I must caution you," he went on to the warders, "not to go to sleep, or I shall be off through that little hole,
pointing to an aperture for ventilating the cell. On the morning of execution he asked how far it was to the gallows, and was told it was quite close.
that the convict's clothes were still the executioner's perquisite.
Often the convicts give way to despair. They are too closely watched to be allowed to do themselves much mischief, or suicides would probably be more frequent.
But it is neither easy to obtain the instruments of self-destruction nor to elude the vigilance of their guard.
The man, Bousfield, however, whose execution was so sadly bungled,
made a determined effort to burn himself to death by throwing himself bodily on to the fire in the condemned ward.
He was promptly rescued from his perilous condition, but not before his face and hands were badly scorched.
They were still much swollen when he was led out to execution.
Miller, the Chelsea murderer, who packed his victim's body in a box, and tried to send it by parcels delivery, tried to kill himself,
but ineffectively, by running his head against his cell wall.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 20: Newgate Notorieties, part 1.
As these records draw to a close, the crimes I chronicle become so much more recent in date that they will be fresh in the memory of most of my readers.
Nevertheless, in order to give completeness to the picture
I have attempted to draw of crime in connection with Newgate, from first to last, I must make some mention, in this my penultimate chapter,
of some of the most heinous offenses of modern times.
The crime of poisoning has always been viewed with peculiar loathing and terror in this country.
It will be remembered that as far back as the reign of Henry VIII. a new and most cruel penalty was devised for the punishment of the Bishop of Rochester's cook,
who had poisoned his master and many of his dependents.
Sir Thomas Overbury was undoubtedly poisoned by Lord Rochester in the reign of James I.,
and it is hinted that James himself nearly fell a victim to a nefarious attempt of the Duke of Buckingham.
But secret poisoning on a wholesale scale such as was practiced in Italy and France was happily never popularized in England.
The well-known and lethal aqua Toffania,
so called after its inventress, a Roman woman named Toffana, and which was so widely adopted by ladies anxious to get rid of their husbands,
was never introduced into this country. Its admission was probably checked by the increased vigilance at the custom houses,
the necessity for which was urged by Mr. Addison, when Secretary of State, in 1717.
The cases of poisoning in the British calendars are rare, nor indeed was the guilt of the accused always clearly established.
It is quite possible that Catherine Blandy, who poisoned her father at the instigation of her lover,
was ignorant of the destructive character of the powders, probably arsenic, which she administered.
Captain Donellan, who was convicted of poisoning his brother-in-law, Sir Theodosius Broughton, and executed for it,
would probably have had the benefit in these days of the doubts raised at his trial.
A third case, more especially interesting to us as having passed through Newgate,
was that of Eliza Fenning, who was convicted of an attempt to poison a whole family
by putting arsenic in the dumplings she had prepared for them. The charge rested entirely on circumstantial evidence,
and as Fenning, although convicted and executed, protested her innocence in the most solemn manner to the last,
the justice of the sentence was doubted at the time.
Yet it was clearly proved that the dumplings contained arsenic, that she, and she alone, had made the dough,
that arsenic was within her reach in the house,
that she had had a quarrel with her mistress, and that the latter with all others who tasted the dumplings were similarly attacked, although no one died.
The crime of poisoning is essentially one which will be most prevalent in a high state of civilization,
when the spread of scientific knowledge places nefarious means at the disposal of many,
instead of limiting them, as in the days of the Borgias and Brinvilliers, to the specially informed and unscrupulously powerful few.
The first intimation conveyed to society of the new terror which threatened it was in the arrest and arraignment of William Palmer,
a medical practitioner, charged with doing to death persons who relied upon his professional skill.
The case contained elements of much uncertainty, and yet it was so essential,
in the interests and for the due protection of the public, that the fullest and fairest inquiry should be made,
that the trial was transferred to the Central Criminal Court,
under the authority of an Act passed on purpose, known as the Trial of offenses Act, and sometimes as Lord Campbell's Act.
That the administration of justice should never be interfered with by local prejudice or local feeling
is obviously of paramount importance, and the powers granted by this Act have been frequently put in practice since.
The trial of Catherine Winsor, the baby farmer,
was thus brought to the Central Criminal Court from Exeter assizes, and that of the Stauntons from Maidstone.
Palmer's trial caused the most intense excitement.
The direful suspicions which surrounded the case filled the whole country with uneasiness and misgiving,
and the deepest anxiety was felt that the crime, if crime there had been, should be brought home to its perpetrator.
The Central Criminal Court was crowded to suffocation.
Great personages occupied seats upon the bench;
the rest of the available space was allotted by ticket, to secure which the greatest influence was necessary.
People came to stare at the supposed cold-blooded prisoner;
with morbid curiosity to scan his features and watch his demeanor through the shifting, nicely-balanced phases of his protracted trial.
Palmer, who was only thirty-one at the time of his trial, was in appearance short and stout, with a round head
covered rather scantily with light sandy hair.
His skin was extraordinarily fair, his cheeks fresh and ruddy; altogether his face, though commonplace, was not exactly ugly;
there was certainly nothing in it which indicated cruel cunning or deliberate truculence.
His features were not careworn, but rather set, and he looked older than his age.
Throughout his trial he preserved an impassive countenance, but he clearly took a deep interest in all that passed.
Although the strain lasted fourteen days, he showed no signs of exhaustion, either physical or mental.
On returning to jail each day he talked freely and without reserve to the warders in charge of him, chiefly on incidents in the day's proceedings.
He was confident to the very last that it would be impossible to find him guilty;
even after sentence, and until within a few hours of execution, he was buoyed up with the hope of reprieve.
The conviction that he would escape had taken so firm a hold of him,
that he steadily refused to confess his guilt, lest it should militate against his chances.
In the condemned cell he frequently repeated, quote, I go to my death a murdered man, end quote.
He made no distinct admissions even on the scaffold; but when the chaplain at the last moment exhorted him to confess,
he made use of the remarkable words, quote, If it is necessary for my soul's sake to confess this murder,
I ought also to confess the others: I mean my wife and my brother's. End quote.
Yet he was silent when specifically pressed to confess that he had killed his wife and his brother.
Palmer was ably defended, but the weight of evidence was clearly with the prosecution, led by Sir Alexander Cockburn,
and public opinion at the termination of the trial coincided with the verdict of the jury.
Originally a doctor in practice at Rugeley, in Staffordshire, he had gradually withdrawn from medicine, and devoted himself to the turf;
but his sporting operations did not prosper, and he became a needy man, always driven to desperate straits for cash.
To meet his liabilities, he raised large sums on forged bills of acceptance drawn upon his mother, a woman of some means,
whose signature he counterfeited.
In 1854 he owed a very large sum of money, but he was temporarily relieved by the death of his wife,
whose life he had insured for £13,000.
There is every reason to suppose that he poisoned his wife to obtain possession of this sum upon her death.
His brother was supposed to have been his next victim, upon whose life he had also effected an insurance for another £13,000.
The brother too died conveniently, but the life office took some exception to the manner of the death, and hesitated to disburse the funds claimed by Palmer.
Palmer tried to get a new insurance on the life of a hanger-on, one Bates, but no office would accept it, no doubt greatly to Bates's longevity.
Meanwhile the bill discounters who held the forged acceptances, with other promissory notes, began to clamor for payment, and talk of issuing writs.
Palmer, alive to the danger he ran of a prosecution for forgery, should the fraud he had committed be brought to light,
sought about for a fresh victim to supply him with funds.
He fixed upon a sporting friend, Mr. John Parsons Cook, who had been in luck at Shrewsbury races, both as a winner and a backer,
whom he persuaded to go and stay at Rugeley in an hotel just opposite his own house.
It was there that Cook was first taken ill with violent retchings and vomitings, all dating from visits of Palmer, who brought him medicines and food.
Palmer's plan was to administer poison in quantities insufficient to cause death, but enough to produce illness which would account for death.
For this purpose he gave, or there was the strongest presumption that he gave,
antimony, which caused Cook's constant sickness.
Quantities of antimony were found in the body after death.
While Cook lay ill, Palmer in his name pocketed the proceeds of the Shrewsbury settling,
and so got the money for which he was prepared to barter his soul.
The last act now approached, and in order to avoid the detection of this last fraud, Palmer laid his plans for disposing of Cook.
He decided to use strychnia, or the vegetable poison otherwise known as nux vomica;
and one of the many links in the long chain of evidence was an entry in a book of Palmer's to the effect that Quote.
strychnia kills by causing tetanic fixing of the respiratory muscles. End quote.
The purchase by Palmer of strychnia was proved.
The night he bought it, Cook, who had been taking certain pills under medical advice, not Palmer's, was seized with violent convulsions.
He had swallowed his pills as usual, at least Palmer had administered them
whether the ordinary or his own pills will never be known, except as may be inferred from the results, which indicate that he had taken the latter.
Cook recovered this time; it was probably Palmer's intention that he should recover, wishing to encourage the supposition that Cook was in a bad way.
Next night Cook had a second and a more violent attack.
That day Palmer had bought more strychnia, and had called in a fresh doctor.
The second attack was fatal, and ended in Cook's death from tetanus.
This tetanus, according to the prosecution, was produced by strychnia, and followed the administration of pills by Palmer
prescribed nominally by the fresh doctor, for which Palmer had substituted his own.
Cook's death was horrible
fearful paroxysms and cramps, ending in suffocation by the tetanic rigor which caught the muscles of the chest.
After Cook's death his stepfather, who was much attached to him, came to Rugeley.
He was struck with the appearance of the corpse, which was not emaciated, as after a long disease ending in death;
while the muscles of the fingers were tightly clenched, not open, as usual in a corpse.
He said nothing, but began to feel uneasy when he found that Cook's betting-book was missing, and that Palmer put it forward
that his friend had died greatly embarrassed, with bills to the amount of £4000 out in his name.
Palmer too showed an indecent haste in preparing the body for interment, and in obtaining the usual certificate.
After this the step-father insisted upon a post-mortem, which was conducted somewhat carelessly.
The intestines were, however, preserved and sent for analysis,
but it was proved that Palmer tried hard to get possession of the jar containing them,
and even sought to upset the vehicle by which they were being conveyed a part of the way to London.
The examination of the stomach betrayed the presence of antimony in large quantities, but no strychnia,
and it was on the entire absence of the latter that the defense was principally based when Palmer was brought to trial.
All the circumstances were so suspicious that he could not escape the criminal charge.
He had already been arrested on a writ issued at the instance of the money-lenders, and an action had been commenced against Mrs. Palmer on her acceptances.
It came out at once that these had been forged, and the whole affair at once took the ugliest complexion.
A government prosecution was instituted, and Palmer was brought to Newgate for trial at the Central Criminal Court.
There was not much reserve about him when there.
He frequently declared before and during the trial that it would be impossible to find him guilty.
He never actually said that he was not guilty, but he was confident he would not be convicted.
He relied on the absence of the strychnia.
But the chain of circumstantial evidence was strong enough to satisfy the jury, who agreed to their verdict in an hour.
At the last moment Palmer tossed a bit of paper over to his counsel, on which he had written, quote, I think there will be a verdict of Not Guilty, end quote.
Even after the death sentence had been passed upon him he clung to the hope that the Government would grant him a reprieve.
To the last, therefore, he played the part of a man wrongfully convicted, and did not abandon hope
even when the high sheriff had told him there was no possibility of a reprieve, and within a few hours of execution.
He suffered at Stafford in front of the jail.
Palmer speedily found imitators.
Within a few weeks occurred the Leeds poisoning case, in which the murderer undoubtedly was inspired by the facts made public at Palmer's trial.
Dove, a fiendish brute, found from the evidence in that case that he could kill his wife, whom he hated,
with exquisite torture, and with a poison that would leave, as he thought, no trace.
In the latter hope he was happily disappointed. But as this case is beyond my subject, I merely mention it as one of the group already referred to.
Three years later came the case of Dr. Smethurst,
presenting still greater features of resemblance with Palmer's, for both were medical men, and both raised difficult questions of medical jurisprudence.
In both the jury had no doubt as to the guilt of the accused, only in Smethurst's case the then Home Secretary, Sir George Cornewall Lewis,
could not divest his mind of serious doubt, and of which the murderer got the benefit.
Smethurst's escape may have influenced the jury in the Poplar poisoning case,
which followed close on its heels, although in that the verdict of "Not Guilty" was excusable, as the evidence was entirely circumstantial.
There was no convincing proof that the accused had administered the poison, although beyond question that poison had occasioned the death.
Dr. Smethurst was long an inmate of Newgate, and was tried at the Central Criminal Court.
He had all the characteristics of the poisoner -- the calm deliberation,
the protracted dissimulation, as with unshrinking, relentless wickedness the deadly work is carried on to the end.
Smethurst's victim was a Miss Bankes, with whom he had contracted a bigamous marriage.
He had met her at a boarding-house, where he lived with his own wife, a person of "shady" antecedents,
and whom he left without scruple to join Miss Bankes.
The latter seems to have succumbed only too willingly to his fascinations, and to have as readily agreed to marry him,
in spite of the existence of the other Mrs. Smethurst.
Probably the doctor had told her the story he brought forward when tried for bigamy, namely,
that Mrs. Smethurst had no right to the name, but had a husband of her own, one Johnson, alive -- a story subsequently disproved.
Miss Bankes seems to have counted upon some species of whitewashing, no less than the repudiation of the other marriage,
and told her sister as much when they last met.
For some months Smethurst and Miss Bankes lived together as man and wife, first in London, and then at Richmond.
She had a little fortune of her own, some £1700 or £1800,
and a life-interest in £5000, a fact on which Smethurst's counsel dwelt with much weight,
as indicating a motive for keeping her alive rather than killing her.
But probably the lump sum was the bait, or perhaps Smethurst wished to return to his temporarily deserted first wife.
Whatever the exact cause which impelled him to crime, it seems certain that he began to give her some poison,
either arsenic or antimony, or both, in small quantities,
with the idea of subjecting her to the irritant poison slowly but surely until the desired effect, death, was achieved.
As she became worse and worse, Smethurst called in the best medical advice in Richmond,
but was careful to prime them with his facts and lead them if possible to accept his diagnosis of the case.
Smethurst was found guilty by the jury, and sentenced to death.
But a long public discussion followed, and in consequence he was reprieved.
The Home Secretary, in a letter to the Lord Chief Baron, stated that, quote, although the facts are full of suspicion against Smethurst,
there is not absolute and complete evidence of his guilt. End quote.
Smethurst was therefore given a free pardon for the offense of murder,
but he was subsequently again tried for bigamy, and sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.
Catherine Wilson was a female poisoner who did business wholesale.
She was tried in April 1862 on suspicion of having attempted to poison a neighbor with oil of vitriol.
The circumstances were strange. Mrs. Wilson had gone to the chemist's for medicine,
and on her return had administered a dose of something which burnt the mouth badly, but did not prove fatal.
Wilson was acquitted on this charge, but other suspicious facts cropped up while she was in Newgate.
It appeared that several persons with whom she was intimate had succumbed suddenly.
In all cases the symptoms were much the same,
vomiting, violent retching, purging, such as are visible in cholera, and all dated from the time when she knew a young man named Dixon,
who had been in the habit of taking colchicum for rheumatism. Mrs. Wilson heard then casually from a medical man
that it was a very dangerous medicine, and she profited by what she had heard.
Soon afterwards Dixon died, showing all the symptoms already described.
Soon afterwards a friend, Mrs. Atkinson, came to London from Westmoreland, and stayed in Mrs. Wilson's house.
She was in good health on leaving home, and had with her a large sum of money.
While with Mrs. Wilson she became suddenly and alarmingly ill, and died in great agony.
Her husband, who came up to town, would not allow a post-mortem, and again Mrs. Wilson escaped.
Mrs. Atkinson's symptoms had been the same as Dixon's. Then Mrs. Wilson went to live with a man named Taylor,
who was presently attacked in the same way as the others, but, but, thanks to the prompt administration of remedies, he recovered.
After this came the charge of administering oil of vitriol, which failed, as has been described.
Last of all Mrs. Wilson poisoned her landlady, Mrs. Soames, under precisely the same conditions as the foregoing.
Here, however, the evidence was strong and sufficient.
It was proved that Mrs. Wilson had given Mrs. Soames something peculiar to drink,
that immediately afterwards Mrs. Soames was taken ill with vomiting and purging,
and that Mrs. Wilson administered the same medicine again and again.
The last time Mrs. Soames showed great reluctance to take it, but Wilson said it would certainly do her good.
This mysterious medicine Wilson kept carefully locked up, and allowed no one to see it,
but its nature was betrayed when this last victim also died.
The first post-mortem indicated death from natural causes,
but a more careful investigation attributed it beyond doubt to over-doses of colchicum.
Dr. Alfred Taylor, the great authority and writer on medical jurisprudence, corroborated this, and in his evidence on the trial
fairly electrified the court by declaring it his opinion that many deaths, supposed to be from cholera, were really due to poison.
This fact was referred to by the judge in his summing up,
who said that he feared it was only too true that secret poisoning was at that time very rife in the metropolis.
Wilson was duly sentenced to death, and suffered impenitent, hardened, and without any confession of her guilt.
Although murder by insidious methods had become more common, cases where violence of the most deadly and determined kind was offered
had not quite disappeared. I will mention two cases of this class, one accompanied with piracy on the high seas,
the other perpetrated in a railway-carriage, and showing the promptitude with which criminals accept and utilize altered conditions of life,
more particularly as regards locomotion.
The first case was that of the 'Flowery Land,'
which left London for Singapore on the 28th July, 1863, with a cargo of wine and other goods.
Her captain was John Smith;
the first and second mates, Karswell and Taffir; there were two other Englishmen on board, and the rest of the crew were a polyglot lot,
most of them, as was proved by their subsequent acts, blackguards of the deepest dye.
Six were Spaniards, or rather natives of Manilla, and men of color; one was a Greek, another a Turk;
there were also a Frenchman, a Norwegian (the carpenter), three Chinamen, a "Sclavonian," and a black on board.
Navigation and discipline could not be easy with such a nondescript crew.
The captain was kindly but somewhat intemperate, the first mate a man of some determination,
and punishment such as rope's-ending and tying to the bulwarks had to be applied to get the work properly done.
The six Spaniards, the Greek, and the Turk were in the same watch,
eight truculent and reckless scoundrels, who, brooding over their fancied wrongs, and burning for revenge,
hatched amongst them a plot to murder their officers and seize the ship.
The mutiny was organized with great secrecy, and broke out most unexpectedly in the middle of the night.
A simultaneous attack was made upon the captain and the first mate.
The latter had the watch on deck.
One half of the mutineers fell upon him unawares with handspikes and capstan-bars.
He was struck down, imploring mercy, but they beat him about the head and face
till every feature was obliterated, and then, still living, flung him into the sea.
Meanwhile the captain, roused from his berth,
came out of the cabin, was caught near the 'companion' by the rest of the mutineers, and promptly dispatched with daggers.
His body was found lying in a pool of blood in a night-dress, stabbed over and over again in the left side.
The captain's brother, a passenger on board the 'Flowery Land,' was also stabbed to death and his body thrown overboard.
The second mate, who had heard the hammering of the capstan-bars and the handspikes, with the first mate's and captain's agonized cries, had come out,
verified the murderers, and then shut himself up in his cabin.
He was soon summoned on deck, but as he would not move, the mutineers came down and stood in a circle round his berth.
Leon, or Lyons, who spoke English,
when asked said they would spare his life if he would navigate the ship for them to the River Plate or Buenos Aires.
Taffir, the second mate, agreed, but constantly went in fear of his life for the remainder of the voyage;
and although the mutineers spared him, they ill-treated the Chinamen, and cut one badly with knives.
Immediately after the murder cases of champagne, which formed part of the cargo, were brought on deck and broached;
the captain's cabin ransacked, his money and clothes divided amongst the mutineers, as well as much of the merchandise on board.
Leon wished to make every one on board share and share alike, so as to implicate the innocent with the guilty;
but Vartos, or Watto, the Turk, would not allow any but the eight mutineers to have anything.
The murders were perpetrated on the 10th September, and the ship continued her voyage for nearly three weeks, meeting and speaking one ship only.
On the 2nd October they sighted land, ten miles distant;
the mutineers took command of the ship, put her about till night-fall, by which time they had scuttled her, got out the boats, and all left the ship.
The rest of the crew were also permitted to embark, except the Chinamen, one of whom was thrown into the water and drowned,
while the other two were left to go down in the ship, and were seen clinging to the tops until the waters closed over them.
The boats reached the shore on the 4th October. Leon had prepared a plausible tale to the effect that they belonged to an American ship
from Peru bound to Bordeaux, which had foundered at sea;
that they had been in the boats five days and nights, but that the captain and others had been lost.
The place at which they landed was not far from the entrance to the River Plate.
A farmer took them in for the night, and drove them next day to Rocha, a place north of Maldonado.
Taffir, the mate, finding there was a man who could speak English at another place twenty miles off,
repaired there secretly, and so gave information to the Brazilian authorities.
The mutineers were arrested, the case inquired into by a naval court-martial,
and the prisoners eventually surrendered to the British authorities, brought to England, and lodged in Newgate.
Their trial followed at the Central Criminal Court.
Eight were arraigned at the same time: six Spaniards, Leon, Blanco, Duranno, Santos, and Marsolino;
Vartos the Turk, and Carlos the Greek.
Seven were found guilty of murder on the high seas, and one, Carlos, acquitted.
Two of the seven, Santos and Marsolino, were reprieved, and their sentences commuted to penal servitude for life;
the remaining five were executed in one batch.
They were an abject, miserable crew, cowards at heart; but some, especially Lopez, continued bloodthirsty to the last.
Lopez took a violent dislike to the officer of the ward in charge of them, and often expressed a keen desire to do for him.
They none of them spoke much English except Leon, commonly called Lyons.
After condemnation, as the rules now kept capital convicts strictly apart, they could not be lodged in the two condemned cells,
and they were each kept in an ordinary separate cell of the newly-constructed block, with the "traps," or square openings in the cell door,
let down. A full view of them was thus at all times obtainable by the officers who, without intermission, day and night patrolled the ward.
On the morning of execution the noise of fixing the gallows in the street outside awoke one or two of them.
Lyons asked the time, and was told it was only five.
Ah!" he remarked, "they will have to wait for us then till eight.
Lopez was more talkative.
When the warder went in to call him he asked for his clothes. He was told he would have to wear his own.
Then he wanted to know when the policemen would arrive, and was told none would come.
The soldiers then?
No soldiers either.
The convicts were pinioned one by one and sent singly out to the gallows.
As the first to appear would have some time to wait for his fellows, a difficult and painful ordeal,
the seemingly most courageous was selected to lead the way.
This was Duranno; but the sight of the heaving mass of uplifted, impassioned faces
was too much for his nerves, and he so nearly fainted that he had to be seated in a chair.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 21: Newgate Notorieties, part 2.
In July 1864 occurred the murder of Mr. Briggs, a gentleman advanced in years and chief clerk in Robarts' bank.
As the circumstances under which it was perpetrated were somewhat novel,
and as some time elapsed before the discovery and apprehension of the supposed murderer,
the public mind was greatly agitated by the affair for several months. The story of the murder must be pretty familiar to most of my readers.
Mr. Briggs left the bank one afternoon as usual, dined with his daughter at Peckham,
then returned to the city to take the train from Fenchurch Street home, traveling by the North London Railway.
He lived at Hackney, but he never reached it alive.
When the train arrived at Hackney station, a passenger who was about to enter one of the carriages found the cushions soaked with blood.
Inside the carriage was a hat, a walking-stick, and a small black leather bag.
About the same time a body was discovered on the line near the railway-bridge by Victoria Park.
It was that of an aged man, whose head had been battered in by a life-preserver.
There was a deep wound just over the ear, the skull was fractured, and there were several other blows and wounds on the head.
Strange to say, the unfortunate man was not yet dead, and he actually survived more than four-and-twenty hours.
His identity was established by a bundle of letters in his pocket, which bore his full address:
T. Briggs, Esq., Robarts & Co., Lombard Street.
The friends of Mr. Briggs were communicated with, and it was ascertained that when he left home the morning of the murderous attack,
he wore gold-rimmed eye-glasses and a gold watch and chain.
The stick and bag were his, but not the hat.
A desperate and deadly struggle must have taken place in the carriage, and the stain of a bloody hand marked the door.
The facts of the murder and its object, robbery, were thus conclusively proved.
It was also easily established that the hat found in the carriage had been bought at Walker's, a hatter's in Crawford Street,
Marylebone; while within a few days Mr. Briggs' gold chain was traced to a jeweler's in Cheapside,
Mr. Death, who had given another in exchange for it to a man supposed to be a foreigner.
More precise clues to the murderer were not long wanting; indeed the readiness with which they were produced and followed up
showed how greatly the publicity and wide dissemination of the news regarding murder facilitate the detection of crime.
In little more than a week a cabman came forward and voluntarily made a statement which at once drew suspicion to a German, Franz Müller,
who had been a lodger of his. Müller had given the cabman's little daughter a jeweler's cardboard box bearing the name of Mr. Death.
A photograph of Müller shown the jeweler was identified as the likeness of the man who had exchanged Mr. Briggs' chain.
Last of all, the cabman swore that he had bought the very hat found in the carriage for Müller at the hatter's, Walker's of Crawford Street.
This fixed the crime pretty certainly upon Müller, who had already left the country, thus increasing suspicion under which he lay.
There was no mystery about his departure; he had gone to Canada, by the 'Victoria' sailing ship, starting from the London docks, and bound to New York.
Directly the foregoing facts were established, a couple of detective officers, armed with a warrant to arrest Müller,
and accompanied by Mr. Death the jeweler and the cabman, went down to Liverpool and took the first steamer across the Atlantic.
This was the 'City of Manchester,' which was expected to arrive some days before the 'Victoria,' and did so.
The officers went on board the 'Victoria' at once, Müller was identified by Mr. Death, and the arrest was made.
In searching the prisoner's box, Mr. Briggs' watch was found wrapped up in a piece of leather,
and Müller at the time of his capture was actually wearing Mr. Briggs' hat, cut down and somewhat altered.
The prisoner was forthwith extradited and sent back to England, which he reached with his escort on the 17th September the same year.
His trial followed at the next sessions of the Central Criminal Court, and ended in his conviction.
The case was one of circumstantial evidence, but, as Sir Robert Collyer the Solicitor-General pointed out,
it was the strongest circumstantial evidence which had ever been brought forward in a murder case.
It was really evidence of facts which could not be controverted or explained away.
There was the prisoner's poverty, his inability to account for himself on the night of the murder, and his possession of the property of the murdered man.
An alibi was set up for the defense, but not well substantiated, and the jury without hesitation returned a verdict of guilty.
Müller protested after sentence of death had been passed upon him that he had been convicted on a false statement of facts.
He adhered to this almost to the very last. His case had been warmly espoused by the Society for the Protection of Germans in this country,
and powerful influence was exerted both here and abroad to obtain a reprieve.
Müller knew that any confession would ruin his chances of escape.
His arguments were specious and evasive when pressed to confess. "Why should man confess to man?" he replied;
man cannot forgive man, only God can do so. Man is therefore only accountable to God.
But on the gallows, when the cap was over his eyes and the rope had been adjusted round his neck, and within a second of the moment when he would be launched into eternity,
he whispered in the ear of the German pastor who attended him on the scaffold,
While in the condemned cell he conversed freely with the warders in broken English or through an interpreter.
He is described as not a bad-looking man, with a square German type of face,
blue eyes which were generally half closed, and very fair hair.
He was short in stature, his legs were light for the upper part of his body, which was powerful, almost herculean.
It is generally supposed that he committed the murder under a sudden access of covetousness and greed.
He saw Mr. Briggs' watch-chain, and followed him instantly into the carriage, determined to have it at all costs.
His crime under this aspect of it was less premeditated, and less atrocious therefore, than that of Lefroy.
One other curious murder may be added to the two foregoing.
Christian Sattler was by birth a German.
He had led a wild life; had left his native land and enlisted first in the French army in Algeria,
afterwards in the British German Legion raised for the Crimean War.
At the disbandment of the force, as he was without resources, he turned his attention to hotel robberies, by which he lived for some years.
He at length stole a carpet-bag containing valuables, and fled to Hamburgh.
Thither, he was pursued by a detective officer,
Inspector Thain, who, being unable to obtain his extradition legally, had him inveigled on board an English steamer,
where the arrest was made.
Sattler was ironed for safe custody,
a proceeding which he vehemently resented, and begged that they might be removed, as the handcuffs hurt his wrists.
The inspector said that they could not be removed till he reached England.
This reply of his contained no promise of immediate release.
Sattler probably misunderstood, and he declared that the police officer had broken faith with him, having, moreover, stated that
while at sea the captain of the ship was responsible for the security of the prisoner.
As Sattler brooded over his wrongs, his rage got the upper hand, and he resolved to wreak it upon Thain.
Although manacled, he managed to get a pistol from his chest and load it.
The next time Thain entered his cabin he fired at him point-blank, and lodged three bullets in his breast.
The unfortunate man survived till he landed, but died in Guy's Hospital.
Sattler was tried for murder and convicted;
his defense being that he had intended to commit suicide, but that, on the appearance of this officer who had wronged him,
he had yielded to an irresistible impulse to kill him.
Sattler was a very excitable although not an ill-tempered man.
While in Newgate awaiting trial he frequently tried to justify his murder by declaring that the police officer had broken faith with him.
He would shoot any man or any policeman like a dog, or any number of them, who had treated him in that way.
His demeanor immediately preceding his execution I have referred to in the last chapter.
Several cases of gigantic fraud, rivaling any already recorded, were brought to light between 1856 and 1873.
I propose next to describe the leading features of the most important of these.
Another case of long-continued successful forgery was brought to light two years after the convictions of Saward and his accomplices.
This conspiracy was cleverly planned, but had scarcely so many ramifications as that of Saward. Its originators were a couple of men,
Wagner and Bateman, who had already been convicted of systematic forgery, and sentenced to transportation, but they had been released on ticket-of-leave
in 1856.
As a blind for their new frauds, they set up as law-stationers in York Buildings, Adelphi, and at once commenced their nefarious traffic.
Forged cheques and bills were soon uttered in great numbers, as well as base coin.
The police suspecting the house in York Buildings, put a watch on the premises, which they kept up for more than a year,
and thus obtained personal knowledge of all who passed in and out, but without obtaining any direct evidence.
At length a man was caught in the act of passing a forged cheque at the Union Bank,
and recognized as one of the frequenters of the bogus law-stationers. His arrest led to that of others.
Among them was a man named Chandler, formerly a bill discounter by profession, who by degrees, to meet his extravagant expenditure,
took to appropriating the bills intrusted to him, and so lost his business, after which he became a clerk to Messrs. Wagner and Bateman.
Chandler while in Newgate turned informer, and betrayed the whole conspiracy.
Besides his employers, a jeweler named Humphreys was in the "swim," at whose shop in Red Lion Square was discovered a quantity of base gold
and silver coins, with all the latest appliances for coining, including those of electroplating;
also a furniture dealer and one or two more commonplace rogues. The arch villain was never taken into custody.
He, like Saward, was an artist in penmanship.
He was a German named Kerp,
eighty years of age, who had spent his whole life in imitating other people's signatures, and had acquired the most consummate skill in the practice.
His copies were generally pronounced indistinguishable from and as good as the originals.
The aged but wary Kerp, the moment the plot was discovered, vanished, and was never more heard of.
Much the same plan was adopted by these forgers as by Saward to get their cheques cashed.
They advertised for clerks, and employed the most likely of the applicants by sending them to the bank.
It was one of these, Glendinning, who had allowed himself to be utilized for some time in this way, whose capture led to the breaking up of the gang.
The principals in this conspiracy, Wagner and Bateman, were sentenced to penal servitude for life,
the others to twenty and ten years.
It was stated in evidence that the monies obtained by these forgeries amounted to £8000 or £10,000,
and that the forged cheques which had been presented, but refused, amounted to double the sum.
Wagner, after conviction, offered to reveal, for a reward of £3000
a system which had long been in practice of defrauding the Exchequer of vast sums by means of forged stamps.
His offer was not, however, accepted.
A more elaborate plot in many ways, more secretly, more patiently prepared than the preceding, or indeed than any in the calendar,
was the case of the forgeries upon the Bank of England discovered in 1863,
but not before the forged paper had been put in circulation for more than a couple of years. In 1861,
a man named Burnett came with his wife and took up his residence at Whitchurch, Hampshire, at no great distance from Laverstock,
where are Messrs. Portal's mills for the manufacture of bank-note paper.
Burnett had only just come out of jail after completing a sentence of penal servitude.
His object in visiting Whitchurch was to undermine the honesty of some workman in the mills;
and he eventually succeeded, his wife making the first overtures, in persuading a lad named Brown to steal some of the bank paper.
Brown took several sheets, and then was detected by Brewer, a fellow-workman of superior grade,
who threatened to betray the theft. But Brewer, either before or after this, succumbed to temptation,
and stole paper on a much larger scale than Brown.
All that was taken was handed over to Burnett, or a "woman in black" whom Brown met by appointment at Waterloo station.
To facilitate his operations, Brewer obtained a false master key from Burnett,
which gave him access to all parts of the mills, the packing-room included.
In this part of the mills a large quantity of bank-note paper was kept at the period of the robbery,
and in the states known as "water-leaf" and "sized," which are the penultimate processes of manufacture.
One more remains, that of "glazing," without which no paper is issued for engraving.
None of the stolen paper was glazed, and this was an important clue to the subsequent discovery of the crime.
Some time in 1862, a large deficiency in stock of bank paper unglazed was discovered at the mills.
Soon afterwards the inspectors of bank-notes at the Bank of England detected the presentation at the bank of spurious notes on genuine paper.
The two facts taken in conjunction
led to the employment of the police, and the offer of a reward of £1500 for the detection of the offenders.
By this time Brown alone had stolen three or four hundred sheets,
each containing two notes, many of the sheets suitable for engraving any kind of note from £1000 downwards.
The amount of Brewer's abstractions (who was eventually acquitted) was never exactly estimated.
Suspicion appears to have rested on Brown, who had left Laverstock,
and he was soon approached by the police. Almost directly he was questioned he made a clean breast of the whole affair.
The next step was to take the principals, and under such circumstances as would insure their conviction.
A watch was set on Burnett, who was followed to the shop of one Buncher, a butcher in Strutton Ground.
Buncher was then tracked to North Kent Terrace, New Cross, where a Mr. and Mrs. Campbell resided,
with whom he did business in exchanging the false notes.
The police officers now taxed Mrs. Campbell with complicity, and frightened her into collusion.
With her assistance on a certain day a couple of bricks were taken out of the wall dividing her front and back parlors;
the officers ensconced themselves in the latter, and waited for Buncher's expected visit.
He came to complete a sale of forged notes, and he wanted a couple of hundred pounds for what he had.
Mrs. Campbell offered him less, and there was an altercation, in the course of which Buncher became very violent, and at length,
after using much intemperate language, he left the place in a huff.
In the course of his remarks, however, he said,
I am the man that has got all the bank paper; I have £30,000 now, and the Bank of England cannot stop it.
This was all the police wanted to know.
They next watched Buncher, and found that he paid frequent visits to Birmingham.
They also discovered that through the intermediacy of one Robert Cummings, well known as a reputed coiner,
he had been introduced to a man named Griffiths, an engraver and copper-plate printer.
Griffiths was an unusually clever and skilful workman,
who had devoted all his talent and all his energies for some seventeen years to the fabrication of false bank-notes.
On a certain day, the 27th October, 1862, the two were arrested simultaneously;
Buncher in London, and Griffiths in Birmingham.
Nothing was found in Buncher's premises in Strutton Ground, which were thoroughly searched,
but proofs of Griffiths' guilt were at once apparent on entering his work-room.
In one corner was a printing-press actually in use, and on it were twenty-one forged Bank of England notes, without date or signature.
On the bed were twenty forged ten-pound notes complete and ready for use, and twenty-five five-pound notes.
Mother plates" for engraving the body of the notes lay about, and other plates for various processes.|"Mother plates" for engraving the body of the notes lay about, and other plates for various processes. LJ018-0172|More than this, Griffiths took the police to a field where, in a bank, a number of other plates were secreted.|More than this, Griffiths took the police to a field where, in a bank, a number of other plates were secreted. LJ018-0173|Griffiths afterwards admitted that he had been employed in defrauding the bank since 1846,|Griffiths afterwards admitted that he had been employed in defrauding the bank since eighteen forty-six, LJ018-0174|and the prominent part he played secured for him on conviction the heaviest sentence of the law.|and the prominent part he played secured for him on conviction the heaviest sentence of the law. LJ018-0175|This was penal servitude for life, Buncher's sentence being twenty-five, and Burnett's twenty years.|This was penal servitude for life, Buncher's sentence being twenty-five, and Burnett's twenty years. LJ018-0176|Cummings, who had introduced Buncher to Griffiths, was also tried for being in possession of stolen bank paper for improper purposes.|Cummings, who had introduced Buncher to Griffiths, was also tried for being in possession of stolen bank paper for improper purposes. LJ018-0177|But as there was no independent corroboration of the informer's evidence, according to the custom of the British law,|But as there was no independent corroboration of the informer's evidence, according to the custom of the British law, LJ018-0178|the case was considered not proved, and he was acquitted.|the case was considered not proved, and he was acquitted. LJ018-0179|On his return to Newgate to be finally discharged, Cummings jumped up the stairs and fairly danced for joy.|On his return to Newgate to be finally discharged, Cummings jumped up the stairs and fairly danced for joy. LJ018-0180|But he was not long at large; he was too active an evil-doer|But he was not long at large; he was too active an evil-doer LJ018-0181|and was perpetually in trouble. Commencing life as a resurrection man, when that trade failed through the change in the law,|and was perpetually in trouble. Commencing life as a resurrection man, when that trade failed through the change in the law, LJ018-0182|and no more bodies were to be bought|and no more bodies were to be bought LJ018-0183|he devoted his energies to coining and forgery, and in the latter line was a friend and associate of Saward's.|he devoted his energies to coining and forgery, and in the latter line was a friend and associate of Saward's. LJ018-0184|One narrow escape he had, however, before he abandoned his old business.|One narrow escape he had, however, before he abandoned his old business. LJ018-0185|A Bow Street officer saw him leaving London in the evening by Camberwell Green, accompanied by two other men.|A Bow Street officer saw him leaving London in the evening by Camberwell Green, accompanied by two other men. LJ018-0186|It was well known that they were resurrectionists, and a strict watch was kept at all the turnpike gates on the southern roads leading into London.|It was well known that they were resurrectionists, and a strict watch was kept at all the turnpike gates on the southern roads leading into London. LJ018-0187|An officer was placed for this purpose at New Cross, Camberwell, and Kennington gates.|An officer was placed for this purpose at New Cross, Camberwell, and Kennington gates. LJ018-0188|Presently "Old Bob" drove up to Camberwell Gate in the same cart in which he had been seen to start.|Presently "Old Bob" drove up to Camberwell Gate in the same cart in which he had been seen to start. LJ018-0189|The officers rushed out to detain him. "What have you got here? We must search the cart," they cry.|The officers rushed out to detain him. "What have you got here? We must search the cart," they cry. LJ018-0190|"By all means," replies Bob, and a close investigation follows, without any detection of the corpse concealed.|"By all means," replies Bob, and a close investigation follows, without any detection of the corpse concealed. LJ018-0191|Bob was therefore allowed to pass on.|Bob was therefore allowed to pass on. LJ018-0192|But they had the body, all the same; it had been dressed up in decent clothes and made to stand upright in the cart.|But they had the body, all the same; it had been dressed up in decent clothes and made to stand upright in the cart. LJ018-0193|With the police officers it had passed muster as a living member of the party.|With the police officers it had passed muster as a living member of the party. LJ018-0194|Cummings was repeatedly "run in" for the offense of coining and uttering bad money, whether coin or notes.|Cummings was repeatedly "run in" for the offense of coining and uttering bad money, whether coin or notes. LJ018-0195|His regular trade, followed before he took to the life of resurrectionist, was that of an engraver.|His regular trade, followed before he took to the life of resurrectionist, was that of an engraver. LJ018-0196|He was a notorious criminal,|He was a notorious criminal, LJ018-0197|an habitual offender in his own particular line, one who would stick at no trifles to evade detection or escape capture.|an habitual offender in his own particular line, one who would stick at no trifles to evade detection or escape capture. LJ018-0198|It is told of "Bob" Brennan, an official specially employed for years by the Mint|It is told of "Bob" Brennan, an official specially employed for years by the Mint LJ018-0199|to watch and prosecute coiners, that he received information that coining was carried on by Cummings and others at a place in Westminster.|to watch and prosecute coiners, that he received information that coining was carried on by Cummings and others at a place in Westminster. LJ018-0200|He went there with a posse of officers and forced his way upstairs to the first floor,|He went there with a posse of officers and forced his way upstairs to the first floor, LJ018-0201|where the coiners, unexpectedly disturbed, fell an easy prey.|where the coiners, unexpectedly disturbed, fell an easy prey. LJ018-0202|But the police nearly paid the penalty of capture with their lives.|But the police nearly paid the penalty of capture with their lives. LJ018-0203|Proceeding cautiously down the stairs, they found that the flooring at the bottom had been taken up.|Proceeding cautiously down the stairs, they found that the flooring at the bottom had been taken up. LJ018-0204|Where it had lain was a yawning gulf or trap sufficient to do for the whole body of police engaged in the capture.|Where it had lain was a yawning gulf or trap sufficient to do for the whole body of police engaged in the capture. LJ018-0205|Cummings was caught shortly afterwards.|Cummings was caught shortly afterwards. LJ018-0206|He was a tall, slender man, with a long face and iron-gray hair.|He was a tall, slender man, with a long face and iron-gray hair. LJ018-0207|The community of coiners of which he was so notorious a member|The community of coiners of which he was so notorious a member LJ018-0208|were a low lot, the lowest among criminals except, perhaps, the 'smashers,' or those who passed the counterfeit money.|were a low lot, the lowest among criminals except, perhaps, the 'smashers,' or those who passed the counterfeit money. LJ018-0209|It was not easy to detect coiners, or bring home their guilt to them.|It was not easy to detect coiners, or bring home their guilt to them. LJ018-0210|Those who manufactured and those who passed had no direct dealings with each other.|Those who manufactured and those who passed had no direct dealings with each other. LJ018-0211|The false coin was bought by an agent from an agent, and dealings were carried on secretly at the "Clock House" in Seven Dials.|The false coin was bought by an agent from an agent, and dealings were carried on secretly at the "Clock House" in Seven Dials. LJ018-0212|The annals of fraudulent crime probably contain nothing|The annals of fraudulent crime probably contain nothing LJ018-0213|which in dramatic interest can compare with the conviction of William Roupell for forgery.|which in dramatic interest can compare with the conviction of William Roupell for forgery. LJ018-0214|As the case must still be well remembered by the present generation, it will be necessary to give here only the briefest summary.|As the case must still be well remembered by the present generation, it will be necessary to give here only the briefest summary. LJ018-0215|William Roupell was the eldest but illegitimate son of a wealthy man who subsequently married Roupell's mother, and had further legitimate issue.|William Roupell was the eldest but illegitimate son of a wealthy man who subsequently married Roupell's mother, and had further legitimate issue. LJ018-0216|William was brought up as an attorney, and became in due course his father's man of business.|William was brought up as an attorney, and became in due course his father's man of business. LJ018-0217|As such he had pretty general control over his father's estates and affairs.|As such he had pretty general control over his father's estates and affairs. LJ018-0218|In 1855|In eighteen fifty-five LJ018-0219|he instructed certain solicitors to prepare a deed of gift as from his father, conveying to him estates near Kingston.|he instructed certain solicitors to prepare a deed of gift as from his father, conveying to him estates near Kingston. LJ018-0220|The old gentleman's signature to this deed of gift was a forgery,|The old gentleman's signature to this deed of gift was a forgery, LJ018-0221|but upon this forged and false conveyance William Roupell, who had already embarked upon a career of wild extravagance,|but upon this forged and false conveyance William Roupell, who had already embarked upon a career of wild extravagance, LJ018-0222|obtained a mortgage of £7000.|obtained a mortgage of seven thousand pounds. LJ018-0223|In 1856 the father died.|In eighteen fifty-six the father died. LJ018-0224|It had been supposed up to this date that he had willed his property, amounting in all to upwards of £200,000,|It had been supposed up to this date that he had willed his property, amounting in all to upwards of two hundred thousand pounds, LJ018-0225|but after the funeral William Roupell produced another and a later will,|but after the funeral William Roupell produced another and a later will, LJ018-0226|leaving everything to the widow, and constituting William sole executor.|leaving everything to the widow, and constituting William sole executor. LJ018-0227|This will was a deliberate forgery.|This will was a deliberate forgery. LJ018-0228|Five or six years later, William Roupell minutely described how he had effected the fraud.|Five or six years later, William Roupell minutely described how he had effected the fraud. LJ018-0229|The day his father died he got the keys of his private bureau, opened it, and took out the authentic will.|The day his father died he got the keys of his private bureau, opened it, and took out the authentic will. LJ018-0230|After reading it, and finding this unfavorable to himself, he resolved to carry out his deliberate plan,|After reading it, and finding this unfavorable to himself, he resolved to carry out his deliberate plan, LJ018-0231|namely, to suppress it and substitute another.|namely, to suppress it and substitute another. LJ018-0232|He himself prepared it on a blank form which he had brought with him on purpose.|He himself prepared it on a blank form which he had brought with him on purpose. LJ018-0233|To this fraudulent instrument he appended forged signatures, and in due course obtained probate.|To this fraudulent instrument he appended forged signatures, and in due course obtained probate. LJ018-0234|As he possessed nearly unbounded influence over his mother, her accession to the property meant that William could dispose of it as he pleased.|As he possessed nearly unbounded influence over his mother, her accession to the property meant that William could dispose of it as he pleased. LJ018-0235|He embarked forthwith in a career of the wildest extravagance, and ere long he had parted in his mother's name with most of the landed estates.|He embarked forthwith in a career of the wildest extravagance, and ere long he had parted in his mother's name with most of the landed estates. LJ018-0236|One large item of his expenditure was a contested election at Lambeth, which he gained at a cost of £10,000.|One large item of his expenditure was a contested election at Lambeth, which he gained at a cost of ten thousand pounds. LJ018-0237|No fortune could stand the inroads he made into his mother's money,|No fortune could stand the inroads he made into his mother's money, LJ018-0238|and in 1862 he was obliged to fly the country, hopelessly and irretrievably ruined.|and in eighteen sixty-two he was obliged to fly the country, hopelessly and irretrievably ruined. LJ018-0239|His disappearance gave color and substance to evil reports already in circulation that the will and conveyance above referred to|His disappearance gave color and substance to evil reports already in circulation that the will and conveyance above referred to LJ018-0240|were fictitious documents. His next brother, who should have inherited under the authentic will,|were fictitious documents. His next brother, who should have inherited under the authentic will, LJ018-0241|forthwith brought an ejectment on the possessor of lands purchased on the authority of the forged conveyance and will.|forthwith brought an ejectment on the possessor of lands purchased on the authority of the forged conveyance and will. LJ018-0242|The case was tried at Guildford Assizes, and caused intense excitement,|The case was tried at Guildford Assizes, and caused intense excitement, LJ018-0243|the hardship to the holders of these lands being plain, should the allegations of invalidity be made good.|the hardship to the holders of these lands being plain, should the allegations of invalidity be made good. LJ018-0244|The effect of establishing the forgeries would be to restore to the Roupell family lands for which a price had already been paid|The effect of establishing the forgeries would be to restore to the Roupell family lands for which a price had already been paid LJ018-0245|in all good faith to another, but a criminal member of the family.|in all good faith to another, but a criminal member of the family. LJ018-0246|At first the case was contested hotly, but, to the profound astonishment of every one inside and outside the court,|At first the case was contested hotly, but, to the profound astonishment of every one inside and outside the court, LJ018-0247|William Roupell himself was brought as a principal witness to clench the case by a confession altogether against himself.|William Roupell himself was brought as a principal witness to clench the case by a confession altogether against himself. LJ018-0248|He told his story with perfect coolness and self-possession, but in a grave and serious tone.|He told his story with perfect coolness and self-possession, but in a grave and serious tone. LJ018-0249|Every word he uttered was said with consideration, and sometimes with a long pause,|Every word he uttered was said with consideration, and sometimes with a long pause, LJ018-0250|but at the same time with an air of the most entire truthfulness and candor.|but at the same time with an air of the most entire truthfulness and candor. LJ018-0251|He confessed himself a perjurer in having sworn to the false will, and a wholesale forger, having manufactured no less than ten false signatures|He confessed himself a perjurer in having sworn to the false will, and a wholesale forger, having manufactured no less than ten false signatures LJ018-0252|to deeds involving on the whole some £350,000.|to deeds involving on the whole some three hundred fifty thousand pounds. LJ018-0253|For these crimes William Roupell was tried at the Central Criminal Court on the 24th September, 1862.|For these crimes William Roupell was tried at the Central Criminal Court on the twenty-fourth September, eighteen sixty-two. LJ018-0254|He declined to plead, but a plea of "Not Guilty" was recorded.|He declined to plead, but a plea of "Not Guilty" was recorded. LJ018-0255|The case was easily and rapidly disposed of.|The case was easily and rapidly disposed of. LJ018-0256|Roupell made a long statement more in exculpation than in his defense.|Roupell made a long statement more in exculpation than in his defense. LJ018-0257|He complained that he had at first been the dupe of others, and admitted that he had too readily fallen astray.|He complained that he had at first been the dupe of others, and admitted that he had too readily fallen astray. LJ018-0258|But while repudiating the charges made against him of systematic extravagance and immorality,|But while repudiating the charges made against him of systematic extravagance and immorality, LJ018-0259|he confessed that his whole life had been a gigantic mistake, and he was ready to make what atonement he could.|he confessed that his whole life had been a gigantic mistake, and he was ready to make what atonement he could. LJ018-0260|Mr. Justice Byles, in passing sentence, commented severely upon the commission of such crimes by a man in Roupell's position in life,|Mr. Justice Byles, in passing sentence, commented severely upon the commission of such crimes by a man in Roupell's position in life, LJ018-0261|and passed the heaviest sentence of the law, transportation for life.|and passed the heaviest sentence of the law, transportation for life. LJ018-0262|Roupell received the announcement with a cheerful countenance,|Roupell received the announcement with a cheerful countenance, LJ018-0263|and left the dock with evident satisfaction and relief at the termination of a most painful ordeal.|and left the dock with evident satisfaction and relief at the termination of a most painful ordeal. LJ018-0264|Roupell was quiet and submissive while in Newgate, unassuming in manner, and ready to make the best of his position.|Roupell was quiet and submissive while in Newgate, unassuming in manner, and ready to make the best of his position. LJ018-0265|He carried this character with him into penal servitude, and after enduring the full severity of his punishment for several years,|He carried this character with him into penal servitude, and after enduring the full severity of his punishment for several years, LJ018-0266|was at length advanced to the comparative ease of a post much coveted by convicts, that of hospital nurse.|was at length advanced to the comparative ease of a post much coveted by convicts, that of hospital nurse. LJ018-0267|His uniform good conduct gained him release from Portland on ticket-of-leave in 1882, just twenty years after his conviction.|His uniform good conduct gained him release from Portland on ticket-of-leave in eighteen eighty-two, just twenty years after his conviction. LJ018-0268|A daring and cleverly-planned robbery of diamonds was that of the Tarpeys, man and wife,|A daring and cleverly-planned robbery of diamonds was that of the Tarpeys, man and wife, LJ018-0269|from an assistant of Loudon and Ryder's, the jewelers in Bond Street. The trick was an old one.|from an assistant of Loudon and Ryder's, the jewelers in Bond Street. The trick was an old one. LJ018-0270|The assistant called with the jewels on approbation at a house specially hired for the purpose in the West End,|The assistant called with the jewels on approbation at a house specially hired for the purpose in the West End, LJ018-0271|and was rendered insensible by chloroform, after which he was bound and the precious stones stolen.|and was rendered insensible by chloroform, after which he was bound and the precious stones stolen. LJ018-0272|Mrs. Tarpey was almost immediately captured and put on her trial, but she was acquitted on the plea that she had acted under the coercion of her husband.|Mrs. Tarpey was almost immediately captured and put on her trial, but she was acquitted on the plea that she had acted under the coercion of her husband. LJ018-0273|Tarpey was caught through his wife,|Tarpey was caught through his wife, LJ018-0274|who was followed, disguised, and with her hair dyed black, to a house in the Marylebone Road, where she met her husband.|who was followed, disguised, and with her hair dyed black, to a house in the Marylebone Road, where she met her husband. LJ018-0275|On Tarpey's defense it was stated that the idea of the theft had been suggested to him by a novel, at a time he had lost largely on the turf.|On Tarpey's defense it was stated that the idea of the theft had been suggested to him by a novel, at a time he had lost largely on the turf. LJ018-0276|The first plot was against Mr. Harry Emmanuel, but he escaped, and the attempt was made upon Loudon and Ryder.|The first plot was against Mr. Harry Emmanuel, but he escaped, and the attempt was made upon Loudon and Ryder. LJ018-0277|The last great case of fraud upon the Bank of England will fitly close this branch of the criminal records of Newgate.|The last great case of fraud upon the Bank of England will fitly close this branch of the criminal records of Newgate. LJ018-0278|This was the well and astutely devised plot of the brothers Bidwell,|This was the well and astutely devised plot of the brothers Bidwell, LJ018-0279|assisted by Macdonell and Noyes, all of them citizens of the United States, by which the bank lost upwards of £100,000.|assisted by Macdonell and Noyes, all of them citizens of the United States, by which the bank lost upwards of one hundred thousand pounds. LJ018-0280|The commercial experience of these clever rogues was cosmopolitan.|The commercial experience of these clever rogues was cosmopolitan. LJ018-0281|Their operations were no less worldwide.|Their operations were no less worldwide. LJ018-0282|In 1871 they crossed the Atlantic,|In eighteen seventy-one they crossed the Atlantic, LJ018-0283|and by means of forged letters of credit and introduction from London, obtained large sums from continental banks, in Berlin,|and by means of forged letters of credit and introduction from London, obtained large sums from continental banks, in Berlin, LJ018-0284|Dresden, Bordeaux, Marseilles, and Lyons.|Dresden, Bordeaux, Marseilles, and Lyons. LJ018-0285|With this as capital they came back to England via Buenos Aires,|With this as capital they came back to England via Buenos Aires, LJ018-0286|and Austin Bidwell opened a bona fide credit in the Burlington or West End branch of the Bank of England,|and Austin Bidwell opened a bona fide credit in the Burlington or West End branch of the Bank of England, LJ018-0287|to which he was introduced by a well-known tailor in Saville Row.|to which he was introduced by a well-known tailor in Saville Row. LJ018-0288|After this the other conspirators traveled to obtain genuine bills and master the system of the leading houses at home and abroad.|After this the other conspirators traveled to obtain genuine bills and master the system of the leading houses at home and abroad. LJ018-0289|When all was ready, Bidwell first "refreshed his credit" at the Bank of England, as well as disarmed suspicion,|When all was ready, Bidwell first "refreshed his credit" at the Bank of England, as well as disarmed suspicion, LJ018-0290|by paying in a genuine bill of Messrs. Rothschilds' for £4500, which was duly discounted.|by paying in a genuine bill of Messrs. Rothschilds' for forty-five hundred pounds, which was duly discounted. LJ018-0291|Then he explained to the bank manager|Then he explained to the bank manager LJ018-0292|that his transactions at Birmingham would shortly be very large, owing to the development of his business there in the alleged manufacture of Pullman cars.|that his transactions at Birmingham would shortly be very large, owing to the development of his business there in the alleged manufacture of Pullman cars. LJ018-0293|The ground thus cleared, the forgers poured in from Birmingham numbers of forged acceptances,|The ground thus cleared, the forgers poured in from Birmingham numbers of forged acceptances, LJ018-0294|all of which were discounted to the value of £102,217.|all of which were discounted to the value of one hundred two thousand, two hundred seventeen pounds. LJ018-0295|The fraud was rendered possible by the absence of a check usual in the United States.|The fraud was rendered possible by the absence of a check usual in the United States. LJ018-0296|There such bills would be sent to the drawer to be initialed, and the forgery would have been at once detected.|There such bills would be sent to the drawer to be initialed, and the forgery would have been at once detected. LJ018-0297|It was the discovery of this flaw in the banking system which had encouraged the Americans to attempt this crime.|It was the discovery of this flaw in the banking system which had encouraged the Americans to attempt this crime. LJ018-0298|Time was clearly an important factor in the fraud, hence the bills were sent forward in quick succession.|Time was clearly an important factor in the fraud, hence the bills were sent forward in quick succession. LJ018-0299|Long before they came to maturity the forgers hoped to be well beyond arrest. They had, moreover, sought to destroy all clue.|Long before they came to maturity the forgers hoped to be well beyond arrest. They had, moreover, sought to destroy all clue. LJ018-0300|The sums obtained by Bidwell in the name of "Warren" at the Bank of England|The sums obtained by Bidwell in the name of "Warren" at the Bank of England LJ018-0301|were lodged at once by drafts to "Horton," another alias, in the Continental Bank.|were lodged at once by drafts to "Horton," another alias, in the Continental Bank. LJ018-0302|For these cash was obtained in notes; the notes were exchanged by one of the conspirators for gold at the Bank of England, and again the same day|For these cash was obtained in notes; the notes were exchanged by one of the conspirators for gold at the Bank of England, and again the same day LJ018-0303|a second conspirator exchanged the gold for notes. But just as all promised well, the frauds were detected through the carelessness of the forgers.|a second conspirator exchanged the gold for notes. But just as all promised well, the frauds were detected through the carelessness of the forgers. LJ018-0304|They had omitted to insert the dates in certain bills.|They had omitted to insert the dates in certain bills. LJ018-0305|The bills were sent as a matter of form to the drawer to have the date added, and the forgery was at once detected.|The bills were sent as a matter of form to the drawer to have the date added, and the forgery was at once detected. LJ018-0306|Noyes was seized without difficulty, as it was a part of the scheme that he should act as the dupe, and remain on the spot in London till all the money was obtained.|Noyes was seized without difficulty, as it was a part of the scheme that he should act as the dupe, and remain on the spot in London till all the money was obtained. LJ018-0307|Through Noyes the rest of the conspirators were eventually apprehended. Very little if any of the ill-gotten proceeds, however, was ever recovered.|Through Noyes the rest of the conspirators were eventually apprehended. Very little if any of the ill-gotten proceeds, however, was ever recovered. LJ018-0308|Large sums, as they were realized, were transmitted to the United States, and invested in various American securities,|Large sums, as they were realized, were transmitted to the United States, and invested in various American securities, LJ018-0309|where probably the money still remains.|where probably the money still remains. LJ018-0310|The prisoners, who were committed to Newgate for trial,|The prisoners, who were committed to Newgate for trial, LJ018-0311|had undoubtedly the command of large funds while there, and would have readily disbursed it to effect their enlargement.|had undoubtedly the command of large funds while there, and would have readily disbursed it to effect their enlargement. LJ018-0312|A plot was soon discovered,|A plot was soon discovered, LJ018-0313|deep laid, and with many ramifications, by which some of the Newgate warders were to be bribed to allow the prisoners to escape from their cells at night.|deep laid, and with many ramifications, by which some of the Newgate warders were to be bribed to allow the prisoners to escape from their cells at night. LJ018-0314|Certain friends of the prisoners were watched, and found to be in communication with these warders,|Certain friends of the prisoners were watched, and found to be in communication with these warders, LJ018-0315|to whom it was said £100 apiece had been given down as the price of their infidelity.|to whom it was said one hundred pounds apiece had been given down as the price of their infidelity. LJ018-0316|Further sums were to have been paid after the escape;|Further sums were to have been paid after the escape; LJ018-0317|and one warder admitted that he was to have £1000 more paid to him, and to be provided with a passage to Australia.|and one warder admitted that he was to have one thousand pounds more paid to him, and to be provided with a passage to Australia. LJ018-0318|The vigilance of the Newgate officials, assisted by the city police, completely frustrated this plot.|The vigilance of the Newgate officials, assisted by the city police, completely frustrated this plot. LJ018-0319|A second was nevertheless set on foot,|A second was nevertheless set on foot, LJ018-0320|in which the plan of action was changed, and the freedom of the prisoners was to be obtained by means of a rescue from the dock during the trial.|in which the plan of action was changed, and the freedom of the prisoners was to be obtained by means of a rescue from the dock during the trial. LJ018-0321|An increase of policemen on duty sufficed to prevent any attempt of this kind.|An increase of policemen on duty sufficed to prevent any attempt of this kind. LJ018-0322|Nor were these two abortive efforts all that were planned.|Nor were these two abortive efforts all that were planned. LJ018-0323|A year or two after, when the prisoners were undergoing their life sentences of penal servitude,|A year or two after, when the prisoners were undergoing their life sentences of penal servitude, LJ018-0324|much uneasiness was caused at one of the convict prisons by information that bribery on a large scale was again at work amongst the officials.|much uneasiness was caused at one of the convict prisons by information that bribery on a large scale was again at work amongst the officials. LJ018-0325|But extra precautions and close supervision have so far proved effectual, and the prisoners are still in custody after a lapse of ten years.|But extra precautions and close supervision have so far proved effectual, and the prisoners are still in custody after a lapse of ten years. LJ018-0326|I propose to end at this point the detailed account of the more prominent criminal cases which lodged their perpetrators in Newgate.|I propose to end at this point the detailed account of the more prominent criminal cases which lodged their perpetrators in Newgate. LJ018-0327|The most recent affairs are still too fresh in the public mind to need more than a passing reference.|The most recent affairs are still too fresh in the public mind to need more than a passing reference. LJ018-0328|Few of the Newgate notorieties of late years show any marked peculiarities;|Few of the Newgate notorieties of late years show any marked peculiarities; LJ018-0329|their crimes follow in the lines of others already found, and often more than once, in the calendars.|their crimes follow in the lines of others already found, and often more than once, in the calendars. LJ018-0330|Violent passions too easily aroused prompted the Frenchwoman Marguerite Dixblanc|Violent passions too easily aroused prompted the Frenchwoman Marguerite Dixblanc LJ018-0331|to murder her mistress, Madame Riel, in Park Lane, as Courvoisier, the Swiss, had been tempted to murder Lord William Russell.|to murder her mistress, Madame Riel, in Park Lane, as Courvoisier, the Swiss, had been tempted to murder Lord William Russell. LJ018-0332|Greed in the latter case was a secondary motive;|Greed in the latter case was a secondary motive; LJ018-0333|it was the principal incentive with Kate Webster, that fierce and brutal female savage who took the life of her mistress at Richmond.|it was the principal incentive with Kate Webster, that fierce and brutal female savage who took the life of her mistress at Richmond. LJ018-0334|Webster, it may be mentioned here, was one of the worst prisoners ever remembered in Newgate|Webster, it may be mentioned here, was one of the worst prisoners ever remembered in Newgate LJ018-0335|most violent in temper, and addicted to the most frightful language.|most violent in temper, and addicted to the most frightful language. LJ018-0336|Webster's devices for disposing of the body of her victim will call to mind those of Theodore Gardelle,|Webster's devices for disposing of the body of her victim will call to mind those of Theodore Gardelle, LJ018-0337|of Good, and Greenacre, and Catherine Hayes.|of Good, and Greenacre, and Catherine Hayes. LJ018-0338|Greed in another form led the Stauntons to make away with Mrs. Patrick Staunton, murdering her with devilish cruelty by slow degrees.|Greed in another form led the Stauntons to make away with Mrs. Patrick Staunton, murdering her with devilish cruelty by slow degrees. LJ018-0339|The judge, Sir Henry Hawkins, in passing sentence|The judge, Sir Henry Hawkins, in passing sentence LJ018-0340|characterized this as a crime more black and hideous than any in the criminal annals of the country.|characterized this as a crime more black and hideous than any in the criminal annals of the country. LJ018-0341|But it was scarcely worse than that of Mrs. Brownrigg, or that of the Meteyards, both of whom did their helpless apprentices to death.|But it was scarcely worse than that of Mrs. Brownrigg, or that of the Meteyards, both of whom did their helpless apprentices to death. LJ018-0342|It was to effect the rupture of an irksome tie that led Henry Wainwright to murder Harriet Lane deliberately and in cold blood.|It was to effect the rupture of an irksome tie that led Henry Wainwright to murder Harriet Lane deliberately and in cold blood. LJ018-0343|In this case the tie was unsanctified, but it was not more inconvenient than that which urged Greenacre to a similar crime.|In this case the tie was unsanctified, but it was not more inconvenient than that which urged Greenacre to a similar crime. LJ018-0344|In cold-blooded premeditation it rivaled that of the Mannings.|In cold-blooded premeditation it rivaled that of the Mannings. LJ018-0345|As in that case, the grave had been dug long in anticipation, and the chloride of lime purchased to destroy the corpse.|As in that case, the grave had been dug long in anticipation, and the chloride of lime purchased to destroy the corpse. LJ018-0346|Henry Wainwright's attempt to get rid of the body was ingenious, but not original,|Henry Wainwright's attempt to get rid of the body was ingenious, but not original, LJ018-0347|and the circumstances which led to detection were scarcely novel proofs of the old adage that murder will out.|and the circumstances which led to detection were scarcely novel proofs of the old adage that murder will out. LJ018-0348|Henry Wainwright's impassioned denial of his crime, even after it had been brought fully home to him, has many parallels in the criminal records.|Henry Wainwright's impassioned denial of his crime, even after it had been brought fully home to him, has many parallels in the criminal records. LJ018-0349|His disclaimer, distinct and detailed on every point, was intended simply for effect.|His disclaimer, distinct and detailed on every point, was intended simply for effect. LJ018-0350|He might swear he was not the murderer, that he never fired a pistol in his life,|He might swear he was not the murderer, that he never fired a pistol in his life, LJ018-0351|and that, in spite of the verdict of the jury, "he left the dock with a calm and quiet conscience;
but there was no doubt of his guilt, as the Lord Chief Justice told him, while expressing great regret at his rash assertion.
Wainwright's demeanor after sentence has been described in the last chapter.
Doubts were long entertained whether Thomas Wainwright,
who was convicted as an accessory after the fact, had not really taken an active part in the murder.
But a conversation overheard between the two brothers in Newgate satisfactorily exonerated Thomas Wainwright.
Poisoning has still its victims.
Christina Edmunds had resort to strychnia, the same lethal drug that Palmer used;
her object being first to dispose of the wife of a man for whom she had conceived a guilty passion,
then to divert suspicion from herself by throwing it on a confectioner, whose sweetmeats she bought,
tampered with, and returned to the shop.
The trial of Miss Edmunds was transferred to the Central Criminal Court under Lord Campbell's Act, already referred to.
She was found guilty.
It will be remembered that she made a statement which led to the empaneling of a jury of matrons, who decided that there was no cause for an arrest of judgment.
Kate Webster followed the same course; but these pleas of pregnancy are not common now-a-days.
Although sentence of death was passed on Edmunds, it was commuted to penal servitude for life;
but she eventually passed into Broadmoor Lunatic Asylum, where she busies herself with watercolor drawing.
The still more recent cases of poisoning which have occurred were not connected with Newgate.
The mysterious Bravo case, that of Dr. Lamson, and that of Kate Dover
unhappily show that society is more than ever at the mercy of the insidious and unscrupulous administration of poisonous drugs.
A case reproducing many of the features of the 'Flowery Land' occurred twelve years later, when the crew of the 'Lennie'
mutinied, murdered the captain and mates, sparing the steward only on condition that he would navigate the ship to the Mediterranean.
The mutineers were of the same stamp as the crew of the 'Flowery Land'
foreigners, vindictive, reckless, and truculent ruffians, easily moved to murderous rage.
The 'Lennie's' men were all Greeks, except one known as French Peter,
who was the ringleader, and who had long been an habitual criminal, a reputed murderer, and certainly an inmate more than once of a French bagne.
Conviction was obtained through the evidence of the steward and two of the least culpable of the crew.
In Newgate the 'Lennie' mutineers were extremely well behaved.
Resolute, determined-looking men, their courage broke down in confinement.
They paid close attention to the counsels of the archimandrite, and died quite penitent. A story is told of one of them, "Big Harry,"
the wildest and most cut-throat looking of the lot, which proves that he could be grateful for kindness, and was not all bad.
He had steadfastly refused to eat meat on some religions scruples, and for the same reason would not touch soup.
He was glad, therefore, to get an extra allowance of bread,
and to show his gratitude to the warder who procured this privilege for him, he made him a present.
It was his own handiwork -- a bird pecking at a flower;
the whole manufactured while in the condemned cell of the crumb of bread made into paste.
The flower had berries also of bread fixed on stems made from the fiber drawn from the stuffing of his mattress,
and the bird's legs were a couple of teeth broken off the prisoner's comb.
Of the lesser criminals, forgers, thieves, swindlers, Newgate continued to receive its full share up to the last.
But there were few cases so remarkable as the great ones already recorded.
Mr. Bamell Oakley made a rich harvest for a time, and was said at the time of his trial
to have obtained as much as £40,000 by false and fraudulent pretenses.
Messrs. Swindlehurst, Saffery, and Langley cleared a large profit
by swindling the Artisans' Dwellings Company; and Madame Rachel passed through Newgate on her way to Millbank
convicted of obtaining jewelery under the false pretense of making silly women "beautiful for ever."
The greatest causes célèbre, however, of recent times were the turf frauds by which the Comtesse de Goncourt was swindled
out of large sums in sham sporting speculations. The conviction of the principals in this nefarious transaction,
Benson, the two Kurrs, Bale, and Murray, led to strange revelations of dishonest practices amongst the detective police,
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 22. Newgate Reformed.
The time at length approached when a radical and complete change was to come over the old city jail.
It was impossible for Newgate to escape for ever the influences pressing so strongly towards prison reform.
Elsewhere the spirit had been more or less active, although not uniformly or always to the same extent.
There had been a pause in legislation, except of a permissive kind. The 2nd and 3rd Victoria, cap. 56
laid it down that individuals might be confined separately and apart in single cells.
By other acts local authorities were empowered to construct new jails or hire accommodation in the district;
but no steps had been taken in Parliament to enforce a better system of discipline,
or to insist upon the construction of prisons on the most approved plan.
As regards the first, however, Sir James Graham, when Home Secretary in 1843,
had appointed a committee of prison inspectors, presided over by the Under Secretary of State, to draw up rules and dietaries,
which were then recommended to and generally adopted by the visiting justices all over the kingdom.
As regards the second, the Government had set a good example, and in deciding upon the erection of Pentonville prison
had embarked on a considerable expenditure in order to provide a model prison for general imitation.
The first stone of Pentonville prison was laid on the 10th April, 1840, by the Marquis of Normanby,
then Home Secretary, and the prison, which contained five hundred and twenty cells, was occupied on the 21st December, 1842.
This building was a costly affair. The site was uneven, and had to be leveled;
moreover, the gross expenditure was increased "partly from its being considered necessary, as it was a national prison,
to make a great archway, and to make the character of it more imposing than if it had been situated in the country, and had been an ordinary prison.
Up to the 21st December, 1842,
with the additions made to that date, the total expenditure amounted to nearly £90,000, or about £180 per cell.
On the other hand, it must be admitted
that this was an experimental construction, and that too strict a limitation of outlay would have militated seriously against the usefulness of the building.
Nor must it be overlooked that this, the first model prison, although obtained at a considerable cost, became actually what its name implied.
Pentonville has really been the model on which all subsequent prison construction has been based. All prisons at home and abroad are but variations,
of course with the added improvements following longer experience, of the pattern originated by the architectural genius of Sir Joshua Jebb.
The internal arrangements of the new model were carefully supervised by a body of distinguished men, among which were many peers, Lord John Russell,
Mr. Shaw-Lefevre, the Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir Benjamin Brodie,
Major Jebb, R.E., and the two prison inspectors, Messrs. Crawford and Russell, with whose names the reader is already familiar.
Major, afterwards Sir Joshua Jebb,
was the moving spirit among these commissioners, and he is now generally recognized as the originator of modern prison architecture.
The movement thus laudably initiated by the Government soon spread to the provinces.
Some jurisdictions, greatly to their credit, strove at once to follow the lead of the central authority.
Within half-a-dozen years no less than fifty-four new prisons were built on the Pentonville plan, others were in progress,
and the total number of separate cells provided amounted to eleven thousand odd.
This list included Wakefield, Leeds, Kirkdale, Manchester, Birmingham, and Dublin.
Liverpool was building a new prison with a thousand cells, the county of Surrey one with seven hundred.
The cost in each varied considerably, the general average being from £120 to £130 per cell.
At Pentonville the rate was higher, but there the expense had been increased by the site,
the difficulty of access, and the admitted necessity of giving architectural importance to this the national model prison.
Other jurisdictions were less prompt to recognize their responsibilities, the city of London among the number, as I shall presently show at length.
These were either satisfied with a makeshift, and modified existing buildings, without close regard to their suitability, or for a long time did nothing at all.
Among the latter were notably the counties of Cheshire, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Nottinghamshire, the East and North Ridings of Yorkshire.
The south and west of England were also very laggard, and many years were still to elapse before the prisons in these parts were properly reconstituted.
Not less remarkable than this diverse interpretation of a manifest duty
was the variety of views as regards the discipline to be introduced in these new prisons. The time was one
when thoughtful people who concerned themselves closely with social questions were greatly exercised as to the best system of treating the inmates of a jail.
A new and still imperfectly understood science had arisen,
the principles of which were debated by disputants of widely opposite opinions with an earnestness that sometimes bordered upon acrimony.
One school were strongly in favor of the continuous separation of prisoners,
the other supported the theory of labor in association, but under a stringent rule of silence, with isolation only at night.
Both systems came to us from the United States. The difference was really more in degree than in principle,
and our modern practice has prudently tried to steer between the two extremes, accepting as the best system a judicious combination of both.
But about 1850 the two sides were distinctly hostile, and the controversy ran high.
High authorities were in favor of continuous separation.
Colonel Jebb preferred it; Messrs. Crawford and Whitworth Russell were convinced that the complete isolation of criminals from one another
was the true basis of a sound system of prison discipline.
Prison chaplains of experience and high repute, such as Messrs. Field, Clay, Kingsmill, Burt, and Osborne, also advocated it.
It was claimed for it that it was more deterrent;
that in districts where it was the rule, evil-doers especially dreaded coming under its irksome conditions.
Another argument was, that it afforded more hope of the reformation of criminals.
The system of associated labor in silence had also its warm supporters,
who maintained that under this system prisoners were more industrious and more healthy
that their condition was more natural, and approximated more nearly to that of daily life.
Better industrial results were obtained from it, and instruction in trades was easier, and prisoners were more likely to leave jail
with the means of earning an honest livelihood if so disposed.
The opposing champions were not slow to find faults and flaws in the system they condemned.
Separation was injurious to health, mental or physical, said one side; men broke down when subjected to it for more than a certain period,
and it was unsafe to fix this limit above twelve months, although some rash advocates were in favor of eighteen months, some indeed of two years.
The other side retorted that the system of associated labor was most costly, so many officers being required to maintain the discipline of silence;
moreover, it was nearly impossible to prevent communication and mutual contamination.
It is scarcely necessary to follow the controversy further. I have only introduced the subject as showing how little as yet the State
was impressed with the necessity for authoritative interference.
The legislature was content to let local jurisdictions experimentalize for themselves; with the strange, anomalous result,
that a thief or other criminal might be quite differently treated according as he was incarcerated on one side or another of a border line.
This variety was often extended to all branches of prison economy.
There was an absolute want of uniformity in dietaries; in some prisons it was too liberal, in others too low.
The amount of exercise varied from one or two hours daily to half the working day.
The cells inhabited by prisoners were of very varying dimensions;
some were not sufficiently ventilated, others were warmed artificially, and were unwholesomely close.
The use of gas or some other means of lighting might be adopted, but more often was dispensed with.
In a great number of prisons no provision was made for the education of prisoners, in some others there was a sufficient staff of schoolmasters and instructors.
The discipline also varied greatly, from the severely penal to the culpably lax.
The greatest pains might be taken to secure isolation,
the prisoners might be supervised and watched at every step, and made liable to punishment for a trifling breach of an irksome code of regulations,
or they might herd together or communicate freely as in the old worst days. They might see each other when they liked, and converse sotto voce,
or make signs; or the chances of recognizing or being recognized were reduced to a minimum by the use of a mask.
There was no general rule of employment. Hard labor was often not insisted upon in separate confinement;
sometimes it embraced the tread-wheel or the newly-invented instruments known as cranks, which ground air.
The alternative between labor or idleness, or the selection of the form of labor,
were mere matters of chance, and decided according to the views of the local magistracy.
They were approved of and employed at some prisons, at others objected to because they were unproductive,
and because the machine was often so imperfect that the amount of effort could not be exactly regulated.
Opinions differed greatly with regard to the tread-wheel; some authorities advocated it as a very severe and irksome punishment,
which was yet under full control, and might be made to work corn-mills or prove otherwise productive;
other authorities as strongly condemned it as brutalizing, unequal in its operation, and altogether a "deplorable invention."
This want of uniformity in prison discipline became ere long an acknowledged evil pressing for some remedy,
and the question was once more taken up in the House of Commons. In 1849 Mr. Charles Pearson, M.P.,
moved for a committee to report upon the best means of securing some uniform system which should be "punitive, reformatory, and self-supporting;"
but the session was far advanced, and the matter was relegated to the following year.
In 1850 Sir George Grey brought forward a new motion to the same effect,
which was promptly carried, with the additional instruction to the committee to suggest any improvements.
The latter had reference more especially to a proposal emanating from Mr. Charles Pearson himself.
That gentleman had come to the conclusion that the ordinary and hackneyed methods of treatment were practically inefficacious,
and that a new system of prison discipline should be introduced.
His plan was to devote the whole labor of prisoners sentenced to any term between three months and four years to agriculture.
District prisons were to be established for this purpose, each of which would be in the heart of a farm of a thousand acres.
The prisoners were to cultivate the land and raise sufficient produce for their own support.
Mr. Pearson backed up his recommendations by many sound arguments.
Field labor, he urged, and with reason, was a very suitable employment;
healthful, easily learnt, and well adapted to the circumstances of unskilled laborers.
Such excellent returns might be counted upon, that a margin of profit would be left after the cost of the prisons had been defrayed.
The scheme was no doubt fascinating, and in many respects feasible;
but Mr. Pearson overlooked some points in which a more practical mind would have foreseen difficulty, and perhaps forecasted failure.
In his proposal he dwelt much upon the humanizing effects of healthful open-air toil,
anticipating the best results from a system which made earnings, and indeed release, dependent upon the amount of work done.
That industry might thus be stimulated and encouraged was probable enough,
and later experience has fully proved the advantage of a judicious system of gratuities for labor;
but Mr. Pearson hardly considered the converse sufficiently, and
omitted the fact that he might have to deal with that persistent idleness which is not an unknown characteristic of the criminal class.
The hope of reward might do much, but no system of penal discipline is complete unless it can also count upon the fear of punishment.
Mr. Pearson seems to have taken for granted that all prisoners would behave well in his district prisons.
On that account he made no provision to insure safe custody,
thinking perhaps that prisoners so well disposed would cheerfully remain in jail of their own accord.
But an open farm of a thousand acres would have offered abundant chances of escape, which some at least would have attempted, probably with success.
The creation of an expensive staff for supervision,
or the still more costly process of walling in the whole farm, would have greatly added to the charges of these establishments.
I have lingered too long perhaps over Mr. Pearson's proposal, but some reference was indispensable to a scheme
which marked the growth of public interest in prison affairs, and which was the germ of the new system
since admirably developed in the convict prisons of this country.
Mr. Pearson and the committee of 1850 have the more claim on our consideration, because,
in the inquiry which followed, attention was again attracted to Newgate.
The condition of that prison in 1850 may be gathered from the pages of the report. Not much had been done to remedy the old defects;
radical improvement was generally considered impossible. The great evil, however, had been sensibly diminished.
There was no longer, or at worst but rarely, and for short periods, the same overcrowding.
This was obviated by the frequent sessions of the Central Criminal Court, and the utilization of the two subsidiary prisons in Giltspur Street and Southwark.
The prison population of Newgate was still subject to great fluctuations, but it seldom rose above two hundred and fifty or three hundred
at the most crowded periods, or just before the sessional jail delivery; and at its lowest it fell sometimes to fifty or sixty.
These numbers would have still further decreased, and the jail would have been almost empty, but for the misdemeanants who were still sent to Newgate
at times on long terms of imprisonment, and for the transports, whom the Home Office were often, as of old, slow to remove.
The old wards, day rooms and sleeping rooms combined, of which the reader has already heard so much,
now seldom contained more than ten or a dozen each. Some sort of decorum was maintained among the occupants in the day-time.
Drinking and gaming,
the indiscriminate visitation of friends, and the almost unlimited admission of extra food, these more glaring defects had disappeared.
But reformation was only skin deep. Below the surface many of the old evils still rankled.
There was as yet no control over the prisoners after locking-up time;
this occurred in summer at eight, but in the winter months it took place at dusk, and was often as early as four or five.
The prisoners were still left to themselves till next morning's unlocking,
and they spent some fourteen or fifteen hours in total darkness, and almost without check or control.
Captain Williams, who was the inspector of prisons for the home district in succession to Messrs. Crawford and Russell,
stated in evidence that he was visiting Newgate one night, when he heard a great disturbance in one of the day and sleeping rooms,
and on entering it found the prisoners engaged in kicking bundles of wood from one end of the ward to the other.
Some attempt at supervision was exercised by the night watchman stationed on the leads, who might hear what went on inside.
If any disturbance reached his ears, he reported the case to the governor, who next morning visited the ward in fault, and asked for the culprit.
The enforcement of discipline depended upon the want of honor among thieves.
Unless the guilty prisoner was given up, the whole ward was punished, either by the exclusion of visitors or the deprivation of fire,
sharp tests which generally broke down the fidelity of the inmates of the ward to one another.
Later on a more efficacious but still imperfect method of supervision was introduced. Iron cages, which are still to be seen in Newgate,
were constructed on the landings, ensconced in which warders spent the night, on duty, and alert to watch the sleepers below,
and check by remonstrance or threat of punishment all who broke the peace of the prison.
These disciplinary improvements were, however, only slowly and gradually introduced.
Other changes affecting the condition and proper treatment of prisoners were not made until the inspector had urged and recommended them.
Thus the wards, which, as I have said, were left in complete darkness, were now to be lighted with gas; and after this most salutary addition,
the personal superintendence of night officers, as already described, became possible.
The rule became general as regards the prison dress; hitherto clothing had been issued only to such as were destitute or in rags, and all classes of prisoners,
those for trial, and those sentenced for short terms or long
wore no distinguishing costume, although its use was admitted, not only for cleanliness, but as a badge of condition, and a security against escape.
Renewed recommendations to provide employment resulted in the provision of a certain amount of oakum for picking,
and one or two men were allowed to mend clothes and make shoes. The rules made by the Secretary of State were hung up in conspicuous parts of the prison;
more officers were appointed, as the time of so many of those already on the staff was monopolized by attendance at the Central Criminal Court.
Another custom which had led to disorder was abolished;
prisoners who had been acquitted were not permitted to return to the prison to show their joy and receive the congratulations of their unfortunate fellows.
The Corporation seems to have introduced these salutary changes without hesitation.
It was less prompt apparently in dealing with structural alterations and improvements.
Well-founded complaints had been made of the want of heating appliances in the jail.
The wards had open fires, but the separate cells were not warmed at all.
A scheme for heating the whole prison with hot-water pipes, after the system now generally adopted elsewhere, was considered,
and abandoned because of the expense. As to the entire reconstruction of Newgate, nothing had been done as yet.
This, with a scheme for limiting the jail to untried prisoners, had been urgently recommended by Lord John Russell in 1830.
His letter to the Corporation, under date 4th June,
is an interesting document, and shows that even at that date the Government contemplated the erection of a model prison.
Lord John Russell, commenting upon the offer of the Corporation to improve Newgate,
provided it was henceforth used only for untried prisoners, suggested that Newgate should be entirely reconstructed, and the new building adopted as a model.
The Corporation had agreed to spend £20,000 on alterations, but £60,000 would suffice to reconstruct.
Lord John, with great fairness, admitted that the whole of this burthen could not be imposed upon the city
seeing that since the establishment of the Central Criminal Court, Newgate received prisoners for trial from several counties,
and he was therefore prepared to submit to Parliament a proposal that half the cost of reconstruction should be borne by public funds.
He forwarded plans prepared by the inspectors of prisons, not for blind adoption, but as a guide.
This plan was on the principle of cellular separation, a system, according to Lord John Russell, desirable in all prisons,
but in a metropolitan prison absolutely essential." The Corporation in reply demurred rather to accepting strict separation as a rule,|"but in a metropolitan prison absolutely essential." The Corporation in reply demurred rather to accepting strict separation as a rule, LJ019-0191|feeling that it approached too nearly to solitary confinement.|feeling that it approached too nearly to solitary confinement. LJ019-0192|The court was, however, prepared to consider Lord John Russell's proposal with regard to the cost of rebuilding;|The court was, however, prepared to consider Lord John Russell's proposal with regard to the cost of rebuilding; LJ019-0193|but as the plan was "confessedly experimental, for the benefit of the country generally, the amount for which the city should be responsible should be distinctly limited|but as the plan was "confessedly experimental, for the benefit of the country generally, the amount for which the city should be responsible should be distinctly limited LJ019-0194|not to exceed a certain sum to be agreed upon.|not to exceed a certain sum to be agreed upon. LJ019-0195|A proviso was also made that the magistrates should continue to exercise full control over the new jail,|A proviso was also made that the magistrates should continue to exercise full control over the new jail, LJ019-0196|free from any other interference than that of the inspectors on the part of Government.|free from any other interference than that of the inspectors on the part of Government. LJ019-0197|No doubt wiser counsels prevailed with Lord John Russell,|No doubt wiser counsels prevailed with Lord John Russell, LJ019-0198|and on a more mature consideration he realized that the limited area of the existing Newgate site,|and on a more mature consideration he realized that the limited area of the existing Newgate site, LJ019-0199|and the costliness of enlarging it, forbade all idea of entirely reconstructing the jail so as to constitute it a model prison.|and the costliness of enlarging it, forbade all idea of entirely reconstructing the jail so as to constitute it a model prison. LJ019-0200|It would be far better to begin at the beginning,|It would be far better to begin at the beginning, LJ019-0201|to select a sufficiently spacious piece of ground, and erect a prison which from foundations to roofs should be in conformity with the newest ideas.|to select a sufficiently spacious piece of ground, and erect a prison which from foundations to roofs should be in conformity with the newest ideas. LJ019-0202|The preference given to the Pentonville system destroyed all hopes of a complete reformation of Newgate.|The preference given to the Pentonville system destroyed all hopes of a complete reformation of Newgate. LJ019-0203|But the condition of the great city jail was evidently considered a reproach by the city authorities, and a year after the opening of the new "model" at Pentonville,|But the condition of the great city jail was evidently considered a reproach by the city authorities, and a year after the opening of the new "model" at Pentonville, LJ019-0204|a serious effort was made to reconstruct Newgate.|a serious effort was made to reconstruct Newgate. LJ019-0205|In 1845 the Jail Committee brought forward a definite proposal to purchase ground in the immediate vicinity for the erection of a new jail.|In eighteen forty-five the Jail Committee brought forward a definite proposal to purchase ground in the immediate vicinity for the erection of a new jail. LJ019-0206|This jail was nominally to replace the Giltspur Street Compter,|This jail was nominally to replace the Giltspur Street Compter, LJ019-0207|The site of which was to be sold to Christ's Hospital, but the intention was of course to embody and absorb old Newgate in the new construction.|The site of which was to be sold to Christ's Hospital, but the intention was of course to embody and absorb old Newgate in the new construction. LJ019-0208|The proposal made was to purchase some fifty thousand square feet between Newgate, Warwick Lane, and the Sessions House,|The proposal made was to purchase some fifty thousand square feet between Newgate, Warwick Lane, and the Sessions House, LJ019-0209|the situation having been proved by long experience to be salubrious.|the situation having been proved by long experience to be salubrious. LJ019-0210|But when this suggestion was brought before the court of aldermen, various amendments were proposed.|But when this suggestion was brought before the court of aldermen, various amendments were proposed. LJ019-0211|It was urged that the area selected for purchase must be excessively costly to acquire, and still quite inadequate for the city needs.|It was urged that the area selected for purchase must be excessively costly to acquire, and still quite inadequate for the city needs. LJ019-0212|The Home Secretary had laid it down that at least five acres would be indispensable, and such an area it was impossible to obtain within the limits of the city.|The Home Secretary had laid it down that at least five acres would be indispensable, and such an area it was impossible to obtain within the limits of the city. LJ019-0213|Now for the first time the Tuffnell estate in Holloway was mentioned.|Now for the first time the Tuffnell estate in Holloway was mentioned. LJ019-0214|The Corporation owned lands there covering from nineteen to twenty acres.|The Corporation owned lands there covering from nineteen to twenty acres. LJ019-0215|Why not move the city prison bodily into this more rural spot, with its purer air and greater breathing space?|Why not move the city prison bodily into this more rural spot, with its purer air and greater breathing space? LJ019-0216|Eventually Holloway was decided upon as a site for the new city prison.|Eventually Holloway was decided upon as a site for the new city prison. LJ019-0217|The necessary preliminaries took some time, but the contracts for the new building were completed in 1849, when the works were commenced.|The necessary preliminaries took some time, but the contracts for the new building were completed in eighteen forty-nine, when the works were commenced. LJ019-0218|The prison was to contain four hundred and four prisoners, and the estimated expenditure was £79,000.|The prison was to contain four hundred and four prisoners, and the estimated expenditure was seventy-nine thousand pounds. LJ019-0219|It was to accommodate only the convicted prisoners sentenced to terms short of penal servitude, and after its completion|It was to accommodate only the convicted prisoners sentenced to terms short of penal servitude, and after its completion LJ019-0220|the uses of Newgate were narrowed almost entirely to those of a prison of detention.|the uses of Newgate were narrowed almost entirely to those of a prison of detention. LJ019-0221|It was intended as far as possible that, except awaiting trial, no prisoner should find himself relegated to Newgate.|It was intended as far as possible that, except awaiting trial, no prisoner should find himself relegated to Newgate. LJ019-0222|This principle became more and more generally the rule, although it has never been punctiliously observed. Now and again|This principle became more and more generally the rule, although it has never been punctiliously observed. Now and again LJ019-0223|misdemeanants have found their way into Newgate, and within the last few years one offender against the privileges of the House of Commons.|misdemeanants have found their way into Newgate, and within the last few years one offender against the privileges of the House of Commons. LJ019-0224|With the reduction of numbers to be accommodated, there was ample space in Newgate for its reconstruction on the most approved modern lines.|With the reduction of numbers to be accommodated, there was ample space in Newgate for its reconstruction on the most approved modern lines. LJ019-0225|In 1857|In eighteen fifty-seven LJ019-0226|the erection of a wing or large block of cells was commenced within the original walls of the prison, and upon the north or male side.|the erection of a wing or large block of cells was commenced within the original walls of the prison, and upon the north or male side. LJ019-0227|This block contained one hundred and thirty cells, embracing every modern improvement;|This block contained one hundred and thirty cells, embracing every modern improvement; LJ019-0228|it also contained eleven reception cells, six punishment cells, and a couple of cells for condemned criminals.|it also contained eleven reception cells, six punishment cells, and a couple of cells for condemned criminals. LJ019-0229|This block was completed in 1859, after which the hitherto unavoidable and long-continued promiscuous association of prisoners|This block was completed in eighteen fifty-nine, after which the hitherto unavoidable and long-continued promiscuous association of prisoners LJ019-0230|In 1861 a similar work was undertaken to provide separate cellular accommodation for the female inmates of Newgate,|In eighteen sixty-one a similar work was undertaken to provide separate cellular accommodation for the female inmates of Newgate, LJ019-0231|and by the following year forty-seven new cells had been built on the most approved plan.|and by the following year forty-seven new cells had been built on the most approved plan. LJ019-0232|During this reconstruction the female prisoners were lodged in Holloway,|During this reconstruction the female prisoners were lodged in Holloway, LJ019-0233|and when it was completed, both sides of the prison were brought into harmony with modern ideas.|and when it was completed, both sides of the prison were brought into harmony with modern ideas. LJ019-0234|The old buildings were entirely disused, and the whole of the inmates of Newgate were kept constantly in separate confinement.|The old buildings were entirely disused, and the whole of the inmates of Newgate were kept constantly in separate confinement. LJ019-0235|With the last re-edification of Newgate, a work executed some seven centuries after the first stone of the old jail was laid,|With the last re-edification of Newgate, a work executed some seven centuries after the first stone of the old jail was laid, LJ019-0236|the architectural records of the prison end. Nothing much was done at Newgate in the way of building, outside or in, after 1862.|the architectural records of the prison end. Nothing much was done at Newgate in the way of building, outside or in, after eighteen sixty-two. LJ019-0237|The Act for private executions led to the erection of the gallows shed in the exercising yard, and at the flank of the passage from the condemned cells.|The Act for private executions led to the erection of the gallows shed in the exercising yard, and at the flank of the passage from the condemned cells. LJ019-0238|The first "glass house," or room in which prisoners could talk in private with their attorneys, but yet be seen by the warder on the watch, had been constructed|The first "glass house," or room in which prisoners could talk in private with their attorneys, but yet be seen by the warder on the watch, had been constructed LJ019-0239|and others were subsequently added.|and others were subsequently added. LJ019-0240|But no structural alterations were made from the date first quoted until the time of closing the prison in 1881.|But no structural alterations were made from the date first quoted until the time of closing the prison in eighteen eighty-one. LJ019-0241|But in the interval very comprehensive and, I think it must be admitted, salutary changes were successively introduced into the management of prisons.|But in the interval very comprehensive and, I think it must be admitted, salutary changes were successively introduced into the management of prisons. LJ019-0242|Newgate naturally shared in any advantages due to these reforms. I propose, therefore, to refer to them in the concluding pages of this work,|Newgate naturally shared in any advantages due to these reforms. I propose, therefore, to refer to them in the concluding pages of this work, LJ019-0243|and thus bring the history of prison discipline down to our own times.|and thus bring the history of prison discipline down to our own times. LJ019-0244|The last inquiry into the condition and management of our jails and houses of correction was that made by the Lords' Committee in 1863.|The last inquiry into the condition and management of our jails and houses of correction was that made by the Lords' Committee in eighteen sixty-three. LJ019-0245|The inquiry was most searching and complete, and the committee spoke plainly in its report.|The inquiry was most searching and complete, and the committee spoke plainly in its report. LJ019-0246|It animadverted strongly on "the many and wide differences as regards construction, labor, diet, and general discipline
which existed in the various prisons,
leading to an inequality, uncertainty, and inefficiency of punishment productive of the most prejudicial results.
The varieties in construction were still very marked.
In many prisons the prisoners were still associated, and, from the want of a sufficient number of cells, the principle of separation was still greatly neglected.
Yet this principle, as the committee pointed out, "must now be accepted as the foundation of prison discipline,"
while its rigid maintenance was in its opinion vital to the efficiency of the jails.
Even where cells had been built
they were frequently below the standard size, and were therefore not certified for occupation as was required by law.
Great numbers were not lighted at night, and were without means by which their inmates could communicate, in case of urgent necessity, with their keepers.
Still greater were the differences with regard to employment. The various authorities held widely different opinions as to what constituted hard labor.
Here the tread-wheel was in use, there cellular cranks, or hard-labor machines.
Both, however, varied greatly in mechanism and in the amount of energy they called forth,
while the former was intended for the congregate labor of a number, and the latter, as its name implies, imposed continuous solitary toil.
At other prisons "shot-drill," the lifting and carrying of heavy round shot, was the favorite method of inflicting penal labor.
With these differences were others as opposed concerning industrial occupation.
The jail authorities often gave the highest, possibly undue, importance to the value of remunerative employment,
and sought to make profitable returns from prisoners' labor the test of prison efficiency. In this view the committee could not coincide,
and it was decidedly of opinion that in all short sentences the hard labor of the tread-wheel, crank, and so forth should be the invariable rule.
In dietaries, again, the same wide diversity of practice obtained.
The efforts made by Sir James Graham years before to introduce uniformity in this particular had failed of effect.
The Secretary of State's suggested scale of diet had seldom been closely followed.
In some places the dietary was too full, in others too meager. Its constituents were not of the most suitable character.
More animal food was given than was necessary.
Vegetables, especially the potato, that most valuable anti-scorbutic, was too often omitted.
In a word, the value of diet as a part of penal discipline was still insufficiently recognized.
The prisons were still far from inflicting the three punishments, hard labor, hard fare, and a hard bed
which Sir Joshua Jebb told the committee he considered the proper elements of penal discipline.
It is interesting to note here
that the committee of 1863 fully endorsed Sir Joshua's recommendations as regards a "hard bed," and recommended that
during short sentences, or the earlier stages of a long confinement,
the prisoners should be made to dispense with the use of a mattress, and should sleep on planks.
This suggestion was adopted in the Act of 1865, which followed the committee's report, and of which more directly.
Clause 92, Schedule 1 of that act authorized the use of plank beds, which were adopted in many prisons.
They are now the universal rule,
introduced, as was erroneously supposed, by the prison commissioners appointed under the Prison Act of 1877.
Their origin it will be seen dates back much further than that.
Beds might well be made hard and their use strictly limited.
According to this committee of 1863, beds in the smaller and most carelessly conducted prisons formed a large element in the life of a prisoner.
In one jail fifteen hours were spent in bed out of the twenty-four. This was in keeping with other grave defects and omissions.
The minor borough prisons were the worst blot on the still dark and imperfect system.
They were very numerous, very imperfect in construction and management, and they were very little required.
In them, according to the committee, the old objectionable practices were still in full force.
There was unrestrained association of untried and convicted, juvenile with adult prisoners, vagrants, misdemeanants, felons.
There were dormitories without light, control, or regulation at night,
which warders, dreading assault, were afraid to enter after dark, even to check rioting and disturbance.
Prisoners still slept two in a bed.
In one prison the bedsteads had been removed lest the prisoners should break them up and convert them into weapons of offense.
The prison buildings were in many places out of repair; other houses often overlooked them.
A single officer was the only custodian and disciplinary authority in the jail.
Complete idleness was tolerated; there was neither penal labor nor light employment.
The prisoners inter-communicated freely, and exercised the most injurious, corrupting influences upon one another.
The total want of administration was very marked,
but in one prison it was such that the prisoners' food was supplied daily from the neighboring inn, and the innkeeper's bill constituted the only accounts kept.
The committee might well suggest the abolition of these jails, or their amalgamation with the larger county establishments in their immediate neighborhood.
Some idea of the comparative uselessness of these small borough prisons was conveyed by some figures quoted by the committee.
In 1862 there were in all one hundred and ninety-three jails in England and Wales;
of these, sixty-three gave admittance during the entire year to less than twenty-five prisoners;
twenty-two others received between eleven and twenty-five;
fourteen received less than eleven and more than six;
while twenty-seven received less than six prisoners, and were in some instances absolutely tenantless.
The result of the recommendation of the committee of 1862 was the Prison Act of 1865,
the penultimate of such enactments, many of the provisions of which still remain in force.
The main object of this act was to compass that uniformity in discipline and treatment generally
which had long been admitted as indispensable, and had never as yet been properly obtained.
The legislature was beginning to overcome its disinclination to interfere actively or authoritatively
with the local jurisdictions, although still very leniently disposed.
However, it now laid down in plain language and with precise details the requirements of a good jail system.
The separation of prisoners in cells duly certified by the inspectors was insisted upon,
also their constant employment in labor appropriate to their condition.
Hard labor of the first and second class was carefully defined.
The former, which consisted principally of the tread-wheel, cranks, capstans, shot-drill,
was to be the rule for all convicted prisoners throughout the early stages of their detention;
while the latter, which included various forms of industrial employment,
was the boon to which willing industry extending over a long period established a certain claim.
The infliction of punishment more or less uniform was thus aimed at.
On the other hand, new and careful regulations were framed to secure the moral and material well-being of the inmates of the jails.
The law made it imperative that every prison should have a prison chapel, and that daily and Sunday services should be held.
The chaplain's duties were enlarged, and the principle of toleration accepted to the extent of securing to all prisoners
the ministrations of ministers of their own form of belief.
Steps were taken to provide the illiterate with secular instruction.
No less close was the care as regards preservation of health.
Stringent rules were prescribed for the prison surgeons;
every prison was ordered to keep up an infirmary, and the medical supervision was to be strict and continuous.
Dietaries were drawn up for adoption on the recommendation of a committee of experts.
Baths were provided, ablutions ordered, and all appliances to insure personal cleanliness.
The administration of good government was to be watched over by the local magistracy, certain of whom, styled visiting justices,
were elected to inspect the prisons frequently, to examine the prisoners, hear complaints, and check abuses.
Under them the governor or jailer was held strictly responsible.
The books and journals he was to keep were minutely specified, and his constant presence in or near the jail was insisted upon.
His disciplinary powers were defined by the act, and his duties,
both in controlling his subordinates and in protecting the prisoners from petty tyranny and oppression, every one of whom he was to see once every twenty-four hours.
But discipline was to be maintained if necessary by punishment,
while decency and good order were to be insured by the strict prohibition of gambling and drunkenness.
The latter was rendered nearly impossible by the penalties imposed on persons bringing spirituous liquors into the jail.
The old custom, so fruitful of the worst evils, of keeping a tap inside the prison was made illegal.
So was the employment of prisoners in any position of trust or authority;
they were not to be turnkeys or assistant turnkeys, neither wardsman nor yardsman, overseer,
monitor, or schoolmaster, nor to be engaged in the service of any officer of the prison.
The Act of 1865 also encouraged and empowered the local authorities to "alter, enlarge, or rebuild" their prisons.
They might raise funds for this purpose, provided a certificate for the necessity for the new works was given, either by the recorder
chairman of quarter sessions, or even by a couple of justices.
Every facility was promised. The sanction of the Secretary of State would not be withheld if plans and estimates were duly submitted,
and they met with the approval of his professional adviser, the surveyor-general of prisons.
The funds necessary would be advanced by the Public Works Loan Commissioners, and the interest might be charged against the county or borough rates.
Nor were these the only inducements offered. Where local authorities were indisposed to set their prisons in order,
or hesitated to embark upon any considerable expenditure to alter or rebuild,
they were at liberty to hire suitable cell accommodation from any neighbors who might have it to spare; the only proviso,
That no such contract was valid between one jurisdiction and another unless the Secretary of State was satisfied that the prison it was intended to use
came up in all respects to modern requirements.
But the act was not limited to permissive legislation. Its provisions and enactments were backed up by certain penalties.
The Secretary of State was empowered to deal rather summarily with "inadequate" prisons, in other words,
with those in which there was no separation, no proper enforcement of hard labor, no chapel, infirmary, and so forth.
He could in the first place withhold the government grant in aid of prison funds by refusing the certificate to the Treasury upon which the allowance was paid.
This he might do on the representation of the inspector of prisons,
who was bound to report any deficiencies and abuses he might find at his periodical visits. The Secretary of State might go further.
Where the local authority had neglected to comply with the provisions of the 1865 Act for four consecutive years,
he could close the "inadequate" prison, by declaring it unfit for the reception of prisoners.
His order would at the same time specify some neighboring and more satisfactory prison which the local authority would be compelled to utilize instead,
and with the concurrence of the other authority, and on payment. A few provisos governed these rather extensive powers.
It was necessary, for instance, to give due notice when the government grant was to be withdrawn,
and with the warning a copy of the particular defects and allegations was to be sent to the local authority.
The latter too was to be laid before the House of Commons.
In the same way, six months' notice was required in cases where the closing of a prison was contemplated;
but if these conditions were observed, the Secretary of State could deal sharply enough with the defaulting jurisdictions.
Yet the law was seldom if ever enforced.
It was practically inoperative as regards the penalties for neglect. It was no doubt as irksome and inconvenient to the Secretary of State
to avail himself of his powers, as it was difficult to bring home the derelictions of duties and evasion of the acts. Too much was left to the inspectors.
It was nearly impossible for them to exercise a very close supervision over the whole of the prisons of the country.
There were only two of them, and they could not visit each prison more than once in each year, sometimes not oftener than once in eighteen months.
The task imposed upon them, tending as it did to the imposition of a fine upon the local authorities, was not a pleasant one,
and it is not strange if they did not very frequently hand up the offenders to the reproof and correction of the Secretary of State.
As the almost inevitable consequence, while the more glaring defects in prison management disappeared,
matters went on after the 1865 Act much the same as they had done before. Districts differed greatly in the attention they paid to prison affairs.
In one part the most praiseworthy activity prevailed,
in another there was half-heartedness, even apathy and an almost complete contempt for the provisions of the act.
As the years passed, great want of uniformity continued to prevail throughout the prisons of the United Kingdom.
The whole question assumed sufficient importance to become a part of the Government program when Lord Beaconsfield took office in 1874.
The Home Secretary in that administration,
Mr. (now Sir Richard) Cross, having applied himself vigorously to the task of reorganizing the whole system, became convinced
that no complete reform could be accomplished so long as the prisons were left under the jurisdiction of the local authorities.
The Prisons Bill of 1876 contemplated the transfer of the prisons to Government.
This bill, reintroduced in 1877, became law that year, after which the whole of the prisons, including Newgate,
passed under the more direct control of the State.
Since then a strong central authority has labored steadfastly to compass concentration,
to close useless prisons, and to insure that uniformity of system which all thoughtful persons had long admitted to be of paramount importance
in the administration of prisons.
Three years after the advent of the prison commissioners, it was decided that Newgate was an excessively costly and redundant establishment.
It was only filled at the periods when the sessions of the Central Criminal Court were in progress;
at others an expensive staff was maintained with little or nothing to do.
At a short distance stood another prison of detention, that of Clerkenwell,
with spare accommodation sufficient to receive all prisoners who were then committed to Newgate. These arguments were unanswerable.
Accordingly, it was ordered by Sir William Harcourt, the present Secretary of State, that Newgate should cease to be used as a regular prison,
and it is now, except during sessions or when the gallows is in requisition, practically and for ever closed.
Marion Harland's Cookery for Beginners. Bread Sponge and Breakfast Breads.
Bread raised with what is known to bakers as a “sponge,” requires more time and a trifle more work than the simpler form for which I have just already given directions.
But it keeps fresh longer, is softer and more nutritious, and a second-rate brand of flour thus treated produces a better loaf
than when mixed up with yeast and water only.
Sponge-making is, therefore, an important if not an essential accomplishment in a cook, be she novice or veteran.
Three potatoes of fair size, peeled and boiled mealy.
Five tablespoonfuls of yeast. One tablespoonful of white sugar.
One tablespoonful of butter.
Three cups of lukewarm water in which the potatoes were boiled, strained through a coarse cloth.
One heaping cup of sifted flour.
Put the potatoes into a large bowl or tray and mash them to powder with a potato beetle, or a wooden spoon.
While still hot, mix in the sugar and butter, beating all to a lumpless cream.
Add a few spoonfuls at a time, the potato-water alternately with the flour by the handful,
beating the batter smooth as you go on until all of the liquid and flour has gone in.
Beat hard one minute before pouring in the yeast.
it is well to stir into the yeast a bit of soda no larger than a grain of corn already wet up in a teaspoonful of boiling water.
Now whip up the batter with a wooden spoon for another minute, and the sponge is made.
Throw a cloth over the bowl and set by for five or six hours to rise.
If you intend to bake in the forenoon, make the sponge at bedtime. If in the afternoon, early in the morning.
When the sponge is light sift a quart and a cup of flour into a bowl or tray with two teaspoonfuls of salt.
Into a hollow, like a crater in the middle of the flour, empty your sponge-bowl, and work the flour down into it.
Wash out the bowl with a little lukewarm water and add this to the dough. If it should prove too soft, work in, cautiously, a little more flour.
If too stiff, warm water, a spoonful at a time until you can handle the paste easily. The danger is in getting it too stiff. Now.
knead and set for risings first and second, as you have already been instructed. This sponge will be found especially useful in making Graham Bread.
One quart of Graham flour, one cup of white flour.
One half cup of Indian meal. One half cup of molasses. Two teaspoonfuls of salt. Soda, the size of a pea.
Half the quantity of sponge given in preceding receipt.
Warm water for rinsing bowl -- about half a cup.
Put the brown or Graham flour unsifted into the bread-bowl.
Sift into it white flour, meal and salt, and stir up well while dry.
Into the “crater” dug out in the middle, pour the sponge, warm water, the molasses, and soda dissolved in hot water.
Knead as you would white bread, and set aside for the rising.
It will not swell so fast as the white, so give yourself more time for making it.
When light, knead well and long;
make into two loaves, then put into well-greased pans and leave for an hour, or until it becomes more than twice the original size of the dough.
Take care that it does not burn in baking. The molasses renders it liable to scorching.
The oven must be steady, but not so hot as for white bread, nor will the Graham bread be done quite so soon as that made of bolted flour.
Turn the pans once while baking, moving them as gently as possible.
If rudely shaken or jarred, there will be heavy streaks in loaves.
Graham bread is wholesome and sweet, and ought to be eaten frequently in every family, particularly by young people whose bones and teeth are in forming.
The phosphates which the process of “bolting” removes to a large extent from white flour, go directly to the manufacture of bone,
and these also tend to nourish and strengthen the brain.
After mixing your bread in the morning either with sponge or with yeast, divide the kneaded dough into two portions.
Mould one into a round ball, and set aside for a loaf as already directed.
Make a hole in the middle of the other batch and pour into it a tablespoonful of butter, just melted, but not hot.
Close the dough over it, dust your hands and kneading-board with flour and work in the shortening until the dough is elastic and ceases to be sticky.
Put it into a floured bowl, cover with a cloth and set away out of draught and undue heat, for three hours.
Knead it again, then, and wait upon its rising for another three hours. The dough should be as soft as can be handled.
When it is light for the second time flour your board, rubbing in the flour and blowing lightly away what does not adhere to the surface.
Toss the lump dough upon it and knead thoroughly for five minutes.
Flour a rolling-pin and roll the dough into a sheet not more than half an inch thick.
Cut this into round cakes with a biscuit-cutter or a sharp-edged tumbler and fold, not quite in the middle,
in the form of turnovers, pinching the corners of the fold pretty hard to hinder the flap of dough from flying up as the rising proceeds.
Rub the bottom and sides of a baking-pan with sweet lard or butter. Do this with a bit of clean soft rag or tissue-paper,
visiting every corner of the pan, but not leaving thick layers and streaks of grease after it.
Arrange the rolls in regular rows in the pan about a quarter of an inch apart.
Cover with a cloth and set nearer the fire than you dared trust the dough, and let them rise for an hour.
Peep under the cloth two or three times to see whether they rise evenly, and turn the pan around once that all may be equally exposed to the heat.
When the time is up and the rolls are puffy and promising, set them in a pretty quick oven and bake half an hour,
turning the pan once in this time, and covering with clean -- never printed -- paper, should they brown too fast.
Break the rolls apart from one another and eat warm. They are also good cold, and if the directions be followed implicitly, very good always.
Graham Rolls are made by treating the dough mixed for Graham bread as above and following the foregoing receipt in every section, but allowing more time for rising and baking.
They are even better when cold than hot.
Breakfast Biscuit.
Two cups of fresh milk slightly warmed.
One quart and a cup of flour sifted.
Five tablespoonfuls of yeast.
One even tablespoonful of white sugar.
One even teaspoonful of salt.
Bit of soda as large as a pea, dissolved in hot water.
One tablespoonful of butter, just melted, not hot.
Yolk of one egg beaten light.
Sift the flour, salt and sugar into a bowl,
hollow the heap in the center and pour in the milk, working down the flour into the liquid with a spoon or your hands until it is thoroughly melted.
Into a second hollow pour the yeast and knead thoroughly for fifteen minutes.
Wrap bowl and biscuit in a thick cloth and set to rise where it will neither become chilled nor sour over night.
Study the temperature in different parts of the kitchen and kitchen closets to the end of finding the best places for raising dough and sponge.
Do all this at bedtime. Early in the morning turn out the dough upon a floured board, work it for a minute into manageable shape;
drill several finger-holes in it and fill them with the melted butter, the dissolved soda and the beaten yolk of egg.
Pinch the dough hard to stop the mouths of these cavities,
and knead for ten minutes, carefully at first, lest the liquids should be wasted, and more boldly when they are absorbed by the paste.
Roll out into a sheet half an inch thick with a floured rolling-pin; cut into round cakes, set these closely together in a well-greased pan;
prick each with a fork and let them rise near the fire for half an hour, covered with a light cloth.
Bake from twenty to twenty-five minutes in a quick oven, turning the pan around once, quickly and lightly.
Break apart from one another and pile on a plate, throwing a clean doily or a small napkin over them. Break open at table.
Hot rolls and muffins should never be cut.
One word with regard to getting up early in order to give dough a chance for the second rising.
It is not a wholesome practice for any woman -- least of all a young girl to be out of bed two hours before she eats her breakfast.
Studying upon an empty stomach provokes dyspepsia and injures the eyes.
Active exercise in like circumstances tempts debility and disease.
Yet our bread and rolls must be looked after at the proper time.
Have yourself called on biscuit mornings an hour earlier than usual.
Rise, wash face and hands, rinse the mouth out and brush back the hair.
Put on stockings and slippers, such underclothing as may be needed to prevent cold, a wrapper and the kitchen apron.
Cover your hair entirely with a handkerchief or sweeping cap.
Before beginning operations downstairs eat a half-slice of dry bread or a biscuit.
You will not relish it, but take it all the same to appease the empty, discontented stomach.
Having made out your rolls and tucked them up snugly for the final rise, return to your chamber for a comfortable bath and toilet.
When habited for the day in all except the outer gown, collar, etc., slip on the wrapper again and run down to put the biscuits in the oven.
Unless it is too hot, they will get no harm while you finish dressing in ten minutes, just in season to turn the pan.
From the beginning of your apprenticeship in housewifery, learn how to "dovetail" your duties neatly into one another.
A wise accommodation of parts and angles, and compactness in the adjustment of "must-be-dones"
are better than mere personal strength in the accomplishment of such tasks as fall to women to perform.
Master these, and do not let them master you.
Weave the little duties in and under and among what seem to be the greater.
While your bread is taking a three hours’ rise, you are free in body and mind for other things.
The grand secret of keeping house well and without worry, lies in the art of packing and fitting different kinds of work and in picking up the minutes.
Other things besides rising dough get on quite as well without your standing by to watch them.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 6.
September 30, 1934.
Three months have passed since I talked with you shortly after the adjournment of the Congress.
Tonight I continue that report, though, because of the shortness of time, I must defer a number of subjects to a later date.
Recently the most notable public questions that have concerned us all
have had to do with industry and labor and with respect to these, certain developments have taken place which I consider of importance.
I am happy to report that after years of uncertainty, culminating in the collapse of the spring of 1933,
we are bringing order out of the old chaos
with a greater certainty of the employment of labor at a reasonable wage and of more business at a fair profit.
These governmental and industrial developments hold promise of new achievements for the nation.
Men may differ as to the particular form of governmental activity
with respect to industry and business, but nearly all are agreed that private enterprise in times such as these
but also our processes of civilization.
The underlying necessity for such activity
is indeed as strong now as it was years ago when Elihu Root said the following very significant words:
Instead of the give and take of free individual contract,
the tremendous power of organization has combined great aggregations of capital in enormous industrial establishments
working through vast agencies of commerce and employing great masses of men in movements of production
and transportation and trade, so great in the mass that each individual concerned in them is quite helpless by himself.
The relations between the employer and the employed, between the owners of aggregated capital and the units of organized labor,
between the small producer, the small trader, the consumer,
and the great transporting and manufacturing and distributing agencies,
all present new questions for the solution of which the old reliance upon the free action of individual wills appears quite inadequate.
And in many directions, the intervention of that organized control which we call government
seems necessary to produce the same result of justice and right conduct
which obtained through the attrition of individuals before the new conditions arose.
It was in this spirit thus described by Secretary Root
that we approached our task of reviving private enterprise in March, 1933.
Our first problem was, of course, the banking situation because, as you know, the banks had collapsed.
Some banks could not be saved but the great majority of them, either through their own resources or with government aid,
have been restored to complete public confidence.
This has given safety to millions of depositors in these banks.
Closely following this great constructive effort we have, through various federal agencies,
saved debtors and creditors alike in many other fields of enterprise, such as loans on farm mortgages and home mortgages;
loans to the railroads and insurance companies and, finally, help for home owners and industry itself.
In all of these efforts the government has come to the assistance of business
and with the full expectation that the money used to assist these enterprises will eventually be repaid.
I believe it will be.
The second step we have taken in the restoration of normal business enterprise
has been to clean up thoroughly unwholesome conditions in the field of investment.
In this we have had assistance from many bankers and businessmen,
most of whom recognize the past evils in the banking system, in the sale of securities, in the deliberate encouragement of stock gambling,
in the sale of unsound mortgages and in many other ways in which the public lost billions of dollars.
They saw that without changes in the policies and methods of investment
there could be no recovery of public confidence in the security of savings.
The country now enjoys the safety of bank savings under the new banking laws,
the careful checking of new securities under the Securities Act
and the curtailment of rank stock speculation through the Securities Exchange Act.
I sincerely hope that as a result
people will be discouraged in unhappy efforts to get rich quick by speculating in securities.
The average person almost always loses.
Only a very small minority of the people of this country believe in gambling as a substitute for the old philosophy of Benjamin Franklin
that the way to wealth is through work.
In meeting the problems of industrial recovery the chief agency of the government has been the National Recovery Administration.
Under its guidance, trades and industries covering over 90 percent of all industrial employees
have adopted codes of fair competition, which have been approved by the President.
Under these codes, in the industries covered, child labor has been eliminated.
The work day and the work week have been shortened.
Minimum wages have been established and other wages adjusted toward a rising standard of living.
The emergency purpose of the N.R.A. was to put men to work and since its creation more than four million persons have been reemployed,
in great part through the cooperation of American business brought about under the codes.
Benefits of the Industrial Recovery Program have come,
not only to labor in the form of new jobs, in relief from overwork and in relief from underpay,
but also to the owners and managers of industry because,
together with a great increase in the payrolls, there has come a substantial rise in the total of industrial profits
a rise from a deficit figure in the first quarter of 1933
to a level of sustained profits within one year from the inauguration of N.R.A.
Now it should not be expected that even employed labor and capital would be completely satisfied with present conditions.
Employed workers have not by any means all enjoyed a return to the earnings of prosperous times,
although millions of hitherto underprivileged workers are today far better paid than ever before.
Also, billions of dollars of invested capital have today a greater security of present and future earning power than before.
This is because of the establishment of fair, competitive standards and because of relief from unfair competition
in wage cutting which depresses markets and destroys purchasing power.
But it is an undeniable fact that the restoration of other billions of sound investments to a reasonable earning power
could not be brought about in one year.
There is no magic formula,
no economic panacea, which could simply revive over-night the heavy industries and the trades dependent upon them.
Nevertheless the gains of trade and industry, as a whole, have been substantial.
In these gains and in the policies of the administration there are assurances that hearten all forward- looking men and women
with the confidence that we are definitely rebuilding our political and economic system on the lines laid down by the New Deal
lines which as I have so often made clear, are in complete accord with the underlying principles of orderly popular government
which Americans have demanded since the white man first came to these shores.
We count, in the future as in the past, on the driving power of individual initiative
and the incentive of fair private profit,
strengthened with the acceptance of those obligations to the public interest which rest upon us all.
We have the right to expect that this driving power will be given patriotically and whole-heartedly to our nation.
We have passed through the formative period of code making in the National Recovery Administration
and have effected a reorganization of the N.R.A.
suited to the needs of the next phase, which is, in turn, a period of preparation for legislation which will determine its permanent form.
In this recent reorganization we have recognized three distinct functions:
first, the legislative or policy making function;
second, the administrative function of code making and revision; and, third, the judicial function, which includes enforcement,
consumer complaints and the settlement of disputes between employers and employees and between one employer and another.
We are now prepared to move into this second phase, on the basis of our experience in the first phase
under the able and energetic leadership of General Johnson.
we shall watch carefully the working of this new machinery for the second phase of N.R.A.,
modifying it where it needs modification and finally making recommendations to the Congress,
in order that the functions of N.R.A. which have proved their worth may be made a part of the permanent machinery of government.
Let me call your attention to the fact that the national Industrial Recovery Act
gave businessmen the opportunity they had sought for years to improve business conditions through what has been called self-government in industry.
If the codes which have been written have been too complicated,
if they have gone too far in such matters as price fixing and limitation of production,
let it be remembered that so far as possible, consistent with the immediate public interest of this past year
and the vital necessity of improving labor conditions,
the representatives of trade and industry were permitted to write their ideas into the codes.
It is now time to review these actions as a whole to determine through deliberative means in the light of experience,
from the standpoint of the good of the industries themselves, as well as the general public interest,
whether the methods and policies adopted in the emergency
have been best calculated to promote industrial recovery and a permanent improvement of business and labor conditions.
There may be a serious question as to the wisdom of many of those devices to control production,
or to prevent destructive price cutting which many business organizations have insisted were necessary,
or whether their effect may have been to prevent that volume of production which would make possible lower prices and increased employment.
Another question arises as to whether in fixing minimum wages on the basis of an hourly or weekly wage
we have reached into the heart of the problem which is to provide such annual earnings for the lowest paid worker as will meet his minimum needs.
We also question the wisdom of extending code requirements suited to the great industrial centers and to large employers,
to the great number of small employers in the smaller communities.
During the last twelve months our industrial recovery has been to some extent retarded by strikes,
including a few of major importance.
I would not minimize the inevitable losses to employers and employees and to the general public through such conflicts.
But I would point out that the extent and severity of labor disputes during this period
has been far less than in any previous, comparable period.
When the businessmen of the country were demanding the right to organize themselves adequately to promote their legitimate interests;
when the farmers were demanding legislation which would give them opportunities and incentives to organize themselves for a common advance,
it was natural that the workers should seek and obtain a statutory declaration of their constitutional right
to organize themselves for collective bargaining as embodied in Section 7 (a) of the national Industrial Recovery Act.
Machinery set up by the federal government has provided some new methods of adjustment.
Both employers and employees must share the blame of not using them as fully as they should.
The employer who turns away from impartial agencies of peace,
who denies freedom of organization to his employees, or fails to make every reasonable effort at a peaceful solution of their differences,
is not fully supporting the recovery effort of his government.
The workers who turn away from these same impartial agencies and decline to use their good offices to gain their ends
are likewise not fully cooperating with their government.
It is time that we made a clean-cut effort to bring about that united action of management and labor,
which is one of the high purposes of the Recovery Act.
We have passed through more than a year of education.
Step by step we have created all the government agencies necessary to insure, as a general rule, industrial peace,
with justice for all those willing to use these agencies whenever their voluntary bargaining fails to produce a necessary agreement.
There should be at least a full and fair trial given to these means of ending industrial warfare;
and in such an effort we should be able to secure for employers and employees and consumers
the benefits that all derive from the continuous, peaceful operation of our essential enterprises.
Accordingly, I propose to confer within the coming month
with small groups of those truly representative of large employers of labor and of large groups of organized labor,
in order to seek their cooperation in establishing what I may describe as a specific trial period of industrial peace.
From those willing to join in establishing this hoped-for period of peace,
I shall seek assurances of the making and maintenance of agreements, which can be mutually relied upon,
under which wages, hours and working conditions
may be determined and any later adjustments shall be made either by agreement or, in case of disagreement,
through the mediation or arbitration of state or federal agencies.
I shall not ask either employers or employees permanently to lay aside the weapons common to industrial war.
But I shall ask both groups to give a fair trial to peaceful methods of adjusting their conflicts of opinion and interest,
and to experiment for a reasonable time with measures suitable to civilize our industrial civilization.
Closely allied to the N.R.A.
is the program of Public Works provided for in the same Act and designed to put more men back to work,
both directly on the public works themselves, and indirectly in the industries supplying the materials for these public works.
To those who say that our expenditures for public works and other means for recovery are a waste that we cannot afford,
I answer that no country, however rich, can afford the waste of its human resources.
Demoralization caused by vast unemployment is our greatest extravagance.
Morally, it is the greatest menace to our social order.
Some people try to tell me that we must make up our minds that for the future we shall permanently have millions of unemployed
just as other countries have had them for over a decade.
What may be necessary for those countries is not my responsibility to determine.
But as for this country, I stand or fall by my refusal to accept as a necessary condition of our future
a permanent army of unemployed.
On the contrary,
we must make it a national principle that we will not tolerate a large army of unemployed and that we will arrange our national economy
to end our present unemployment as soon as we can and then to take wise measures against its return.
I do not want to think that it is the destiny of any American to remain permanently on relief rolls.
Those, fortunately few in number, who are frightened by boldness and cowed by the necessity for making decisions,
complain that all we have done is unnecessary and subject to great risks.
Now that these people are coming out of their storm cellars, they forget that there ever was a storm.
They point to England.
They would have you believe that England has made progress out of her depression by a do-nothing policy, by letting nature take her course.
England has her peculiarities and we have ours
but I do not believe any intelligent observer can accuse England of undue orthodoxy in the present emergency.
Did England let nature take her course? No.
Did England hold to the gold standard when her reserves were threatened?
Has England gone back to the gold standard today?
Did England hesitate to call in ten billion dollars of her war bonds bearing 5 percent interest,
to issue new bonds therefore bearing only 3 and one half percent interest,
thereby saving the British treasury one hundred and fifty million dollars a year in interest alone?
And let it be recorded that the British bankers helped.
Is it not a fact that ever since the year 1909,
Great Britain in many ways has advanced further along lines of social security than the United States?
Is it not a fact that relations between capital and labor on the basis of collective bargaining are much further advanced in Great Britain
than in the United States?
It is perhaps not strange that the conservative British press has told us with pardonable irony
that much of our New Deal program is only an attempt to catch up with English reforms that go back ten years or more.
Nearly all Americans are sensible and calm people.
We do not get greatly excited nor is our peace of mind disturbed, whether we be businessmen or workers or farmers,
by awesome pronouncements concerning the unconstitutionality of some of our measures of recovery and relief and reform.
We are not frightened by reactionary lawyers or political editors.
All of these cries have been heard before.
More than twenty years ago, when Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson were attempting to correct abuses in our national life,
the great Chief Justice White said:
There is great danger it seems to me to arise from the constant habit which prevails where anything is opposed or objected to,
of referring without rhyme or reason to the Constitution as a means of preventing its accomplishment, thus creating the general impression
that the Constitution is but a barrier to progress instead of being the broad highway through which alone true progress may be enjoyed.
In our efforts for recovery
we have avoided on the one hand the theory that business should and must be taken over into an all-embracing government.
We have avoided on the other hand
the equally untenable theory that it is an interference with liberty to offer reasonable help when private enterprise is in need of help.
The course we have followed fits the American practice of government -- a practice of taking action step by step,
of regulating only to meet concrete needs -- a practice of courageous recognition of change.
I believe with Abraham Lincoln, that "The legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people
whatever they need to have done but cannot do at all or cannot do so well for themselves in their separate and individual capacities."
I am not for a return to that definition of liberty under which for many years a free people were being gradually regimented
into the service of the privileged few.
I prefer and I am sure you prefer that broader definition of liberty under which we are moving forward to greater freedom,
to greater security for the average man than he has ever known before in the history of America.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 7.
April 28, 1935.
Since my annual message to the Congress on January fourth, last, I have not addressed the general public over the air.
In the many weeks since that time the Congress has devoted itself to the arduous task of formulating legislation necessary to the country's welfare.
It has made and is making distinct progress.
Before I come to any of the specific measures, however, I want to leave in your minds one clear fact.
The administration and the Congress are not proceeding in any haphazard fashion in this task of government.
Each of our steps has a definite relationship to every other step.
The job of creating a program for the nation's welfare is, in some respects, like the building of a ship.
At different points on the coast where I often visit they build great seagoing ships.
When one of these ships is under construction and the steel frames have been set in the keel,
it is difficult for a person who does not know ships to tell how it will finally look when it is sailing the high seas.
It may seem confused to some, but out of the multitude of detailed parts that go into the making of the structure
the creation of a useful instrument for man ultimately comes.
It is that way with the making of a national policy. The objective of the nation has greatly changed in three years
Before that time individual self- interest and group selfishness were paramount in public thinking.
The general good was at a discount.
Three years of hard thinking have changed the picture.
More and more people,
cause of clearer thinking and a better understanding, are considering the whole rather than a mere part relating to one section or to one crop,
or to one industry, or to an individual private occupation.
That is a tremendous gain for the principles of democracy.
The overwhelming majority of people in this country know how to sift the wheat from the chaff in what they hear and what they read.
They know that the process of the constructive rebuilding of America cannot be done in a day or a year,
but that it is being done in spite of the few who seek to confuse them and to profit by their confusion.
Americans as a whole are feeling a lot better -- a lot more cheerful than for many, many years.
The most difficult place in the world to get a clear open perspective of the country as a whole is Washington.
I am reminded sometimes of what President Wilson once said:
So many people come to Washington who know things that are not so,
and so few people who know anything about what the people of the United States are thinking about.
That is why I occasionally leave this scene of action for a few days
to go fishing or back home to Hyde Park, so that I can have a chance to think quietly about the country as a whole.
To get away from the trees", as they say, "and to look at the whole forest.
This duty of seeing the country in a long-range perspective
is one which, in a very special manner, attaches to this office to which you have chosen me.
Did you ever stop to think that there are, after all, only two positions in the nation
that are filled by the vote of all of the voters -- the President and the Vice-President?
That makes it particularly necessary for the Vice- President and for me to conceive of our duty toward the entire country.
I speak, therefore, tonight, to and of the American people as a whole.
My most immediate concern is in carrying out the purposes of the great work program just enacted by the Congress.
Its first objective is to put men and women now on the relief rolls to work and, incidentally,
to assist materially in our already unmistakable march toward recovery.
I shall not confuse my discussion by a multitude of figures. So many figures are quoted to prove so many things.
Sometimes it depends upon what paper you read and what broadcast you hear.
Therefore, let us keep our minds on two or three simple, essential facts in connection with this problem of unemployment.
It is true that while business and industry are definitely better our relief rolls are still too large.
However, for the first time in five years the relief rolls have declined instead of increased during the winter months.
They are still declining.
The simple fact is that many million more people have private work today than two years ago today or one year ago today,
and every day that passes offers more chances to work for those who want to work.
In spite of the fact that unemployment remains a serious problem
here as in every other nation, we have come to recognize the possibility and the necessity of certain helpful remedial measures.
These measures are of two kinds.
The first is to make provisions intended to relieve, to minimize, and to prevent future unemployment;
the second is to establish the practical means to help those who are unemployed in this present emergency.
Our social security legislation is an attempt to answer the first of these questions; our Works Relief program, the second.
The program for social security now pending before the Congress is a necessary part of the future unemployment policy of the government.
While our present and projected expenditures for work relief are wholly within the reasonable limits of our national credit resources,
it is obvious that we cannot continue to create governmental deficits for that purpose year after year.
We must begin now to make provision for the future.
That is why our social security program is an important part of the complete picture.
It proposes, by means of old age pensions,
to help those who have reached the age of retirement to give up their jobs and thus give to the younger generation greater opportunities for work
and to give to all a feeling of security as they look toward old age.
The unemployment insurance part of the legislation
will not only help to guard the individual in future periods of lay-off against dependence upon relief,
but it will, by sustaining purchasing power, cushion the shock of economic distress.
Another helpful feature of unemployment insurance is the incentive it will give to employers to plan more carefully
in order that unemployment may be prevented by the stabilizing of employment itself.
Provisions for social security, however, are protections for the future.
Our responsibility for the immediate necessities of the unemployed has been met by the Congress
through the most comprehensive work plan in the history of the nation.
Our problem is to put to work three and one-half million employable persons now on the relief rolls.
It is a problem quite as much for private industry as for the government.
We are losing no time getting the government's vast work relief program underway,
and we have every reason to believe that it should be in full swing by autumn.
In directing it, I shall recognize six fundamental principles:
1. The projects should be useful.
Projects shall be of a nature that a considerable proportion of the money spent will go into wages for labor.
Projects will be sought which promise ultimate return to the federal treasury of a considerable proportion of the costs.
Funds allotted for each project should be actually and promptly spent and not held over until later years.
In all cases projects must be of a character to give employment to those on the relief rolls.
6. Projects will be allocated to localities or relief areas in relation to the number of workers on relief rolls in those areas.
I next want to make it clear exactly how we shall direct the work.
I have set up a Division of Applications and Information
to which all proposals for the expenditure of money must go for preliminary study and consideration.
After the Division of Applications and Information has sifted those projects,
they will be sent to an Allotment Division composed of representatives of the more important governmental agencies
charged with carrying on work relief projects.
The group will also include representatives of cities, and of labor, farming, banking and industry.
This Allotment Division will consider all of the recommendations submitted to it
and such projects as they approve will be next submitted to the President who under the Act is required to make final allocations.
The next step will be to notify the proper government agency
in whose field the project falls, and also to notify another agency which I am creating -- a Progress Division.
This Division will have the duty of coordinating the purchases of materials and supplies
and of making certain that people who are employed will be taken from the relief rolls.
It will also have the responsibility of determining work payments in various localities,
of making full use of existing employment services and to assist people engaged in relief work
to move as rapidly as possible back into private employment when such employment is available.
Moreover, this Division will be charged with keeping projects moving on schedule.
I have felt it to be essentially wise and prudent to avoid, so far as possible,
the creation of new governmental machinery for supervising this work.
The national government now has at least sixty different agencies with the staff
and the experience and the competence necessary to carry on the two hundred and fifty or three hundred kinds of work that will be undertaken.
These agencies, therefore, will simply be doing on a somewhat enlarged scale the same sort of things that they have been doing.
This will make certain that the largest possible portion of the funds allotted
will be spent for actually creating new work and not for building up expensive overhead organizations here in Washington.
For many months preparations have been under way.
The allotment of funds for desirable projects has already begun.
The key men for the major responsibilities of this great task already have been selected.
I well realize that the country is expecting before this year is out to see the "dirt fly", as they say, in carrying on the work,
and I assure my fellow citizens that no energy will be spared in using these funds effectively
to make a major attack upon the problem of unemployment.
Our responsibility is to all of the people in this country.
This is a great national crusade to destroy enforced idleness which is an enemy of the human spirit
generated by this depression
Our attack upon these enemies must be without stint and without discrimination.
No sectional, no political distinctions can be permitted.
It must, however, be recognized that when an enterprise of this character is extended over more than three thousand counties throughout the nation,
there may be occasional instances of inefficiency, bad management, or misuse of funds.
When cases of this kind occur,
there will be those, of course, who will try to tell you that the exceptional failure is characteristic of the entire endeavor.
It should be remembered that in every big job there are some imperfections.
There are chiselers in every walk of life; there are those in every industry who are guilty of unfair practices;
every profession has its black sheep, but long experience in government has taught me
that the exceptional instances of wrong-doing in government are probably less numerous than in almost every other line of endeavor.
The most effective means of preventing such evils in this Works Relief program will be the eternal vigilance of the American people themselves.
I call upon my fellow citizens everywhere to cooperate with me
in making this the most efficient and the cleanest example of public enterprise the world has ever seen.
It is time to provide a smashing answer for those cynical men who say that a democracy cannot be honest and efficient.
If you will help, this can be done.
I, therefore, hope you will watch the work in every corner of this Nation.
Feel free to criticize. Tell me of instances where work can be done better, or where improper practices prevail.
Neither you nor I want criticism conceived in a purely fault-finding or partisan spirit,
but I am jealous of the right of every citizen to call to the attention of his or her government
examples of how the public money can be more effectively spent for the benefit of the American people.
I now come, my friends, to a part of the remaining business before the Congress.
It has under consideration many measures which provide for the rounding out of the program of economic and social reconstruction
with which we have been concerned for two years.
I can mention only a few of them tonight, but I do not want my mention of specific measures
to be interpreted as lack of interest in or disapproval of many other important proposals that are pending.
The National Industrial Recovery Act expires on the sixteenth of June.
After careful consideration, I have asked the Congress to extend the life of this useful agency of government.
As we have proceeded with the administration of this Act,
we have found from time to time more and more useful ways of promoting its purposes.
No reasonable person wants to abandon our present gains
we must continue to protect children,
to enforce minimum wages, to prevent excessive hours,
to safeguard, define and enforce collective bargaining, and, while retaining fair competition,
to eliminate so far as humanly possible, the kinds of unfair practices by selfish minorities which unfortunately
did more than anything else to bring about the recent collapse of industries.
There is likewise pending before the Congress
legislation to provide for the elimination of unnecessary holding companies in the public utility field.
I consider this legislation a positive recovery measure.
Power production in this country is virtually back to the 1929 peak.
The operating companies in the gas and electric utility field are by and large in good condition, but
under holding company domination the utility industry has long been hopelessly at war within itself and with public sentiment.
By far the greater part of the general decline in utility securities had occurred before I was inaugurated.
The absentee management of unnecessary holding company control
has lost touch with, and has lost the sympathy of, the communities it pretends to serve.
Even more significantly it has given the country as a whole an uneasy apprehension of overconcentrated economic power.
A business that loses the confidence of its customers and the goodwill of the public cannot long continue to be a good risk for the investor.
This legislation will serve the investor by ending the conditions which have caused that lack of confidence and goodwill.
It will put the public utility operating industry on a sound basis for the future,
both in its public relations and in its internal relations.
This legislation will not only in the long run result in providing lower electric and gas rates to the consumer,
but it will protect the actual value and earning power of properties now owned by thousands of investors
who have little protection under the old laws against what used to be called frenzied finance.
It will not destroy values.
Not only business recovery, but the general economic recovery of the nation will be greatly stimulated by the enactment of legislation
designed to improve the status of our transportation agencies.
There is need for legislation providing for the regulation of interstate transportation by buses and trucks,
for the regulation of transportation by water, for the strengthening of our Merchant Marine and Air Transport,
for the strengthening of the Interstate Commerce Commission to enable it to carry out a rounded conception of the national transportation system
in which the benefits of private ownership are retained while the public stake in these important services is protected by the public's government.
Finally, the reestablishment of public confidence in the banks of the nation
is one of the most hopeful results of our efforts as a Nation to reestablish public confidence in private banking.
We all know that private banking actually exists by virtue of the permission of and regulation by the people as a whole,
speaking through their government.
Wise public policy, however, requires not only that banking be safe
but that its resources be most fully utilized in the economic life of the country
To this end it was decided more than twenty years ago
that the government should assume the responsibility of providing a means by which the credit of the nation might be controlled,
not by a few private banking institutions, but by a body with public prestige and authority.
The answer to this demand was the Federal Reserve System.
Twenty years of experience with this system have justified the efforts made to create it,
but these twenty years have shown by experience definite possibilities for improvement.
Certain proposals made to amend the Federal Reserve Act deserve prompt and favorable action by the Congress.
They are a minimum of wise readjustments of our Federal Reserve System in the light of past experience and present needs.
These measures I have mentioned are, in large part, the program which under my constitutional duty I have recommended to the Congress.
They are essential factors in a rounded program for national recovery.
They contemplate the enrichment of our national life
by a sound and rational ordering of its various elements and wise provisions for the protection of the weak against the strong.
Never since my inauguration in March, 1933, have I felt so unmistakably the atmosphere of recovery.
But it is more than the recovery of the material basis of our individual lives.
It is the recovery of confidence in our democratic processes and institutions.
We have survived all of the arduous burdens and the threatening dangers of a great economic calamity.
We have in the darkest moments of our national trials retained our faith in our own ability to master our destiny.
Fear is vanishing and confidence is growing on every side,
renewed faith in the vast possibilities of human beings to improve their material and spiritual status
through the instrumentality of the democratic form of government.
That faith is receiving its just reward.
For that we can be thankful to the God who watches over America.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 9.
March 9, 1937. Part one.
Last Thursday I described in detail certain economic problems which everyone admits now face the nation.
For the many messages which have come to me after that speech, and which it is physically impossible to answer individually,
I take this means of saying "thank you."
Tonight, sitting at my desk in the White House, I make my first radio report to the people in my second term of office.
I am reminded of that evening in March, four years ago, when I made my first radio report to you.
We were then in the midst of the great banking crisis.
Soon after, with the authority of the Congress,
we asked the nation to turn over all of its privately held gold, dollar for dollar, to the government of the United States.
Today's recovery proves how right that policy was.
But when, almost two years later, it came before the Supreme Court its constitutionality was upheld only by a five-to-four vote.
The change of one vote would have thrown all the affairs of this great Nation back into hopeless chaos.
In effect, four Justices ruled that the right under a private contract
to exact a pound of flesh was more sacred than the main objectives of the Constitution to establish an enduring Nation.
In 1933 you and I knew that we must never let our economic system get completely out of joint again
that we could not afford to take the risk of another great depression.
We also became convinced that the only way to avoid a repetition of those dark days was to have a government with power to prevent
and to cure the abuses and the inequalities which had thrown that system out of joint.
We then began a program of remedying those abuses and inequalities -- to give balance and stability to our economic system
to make it bomb-proof against the causes of 1929.
Today we are only part-way through that program
and recovery is speeding up to a point where the dangers of 1929 are again becoming possible,
not this week or month perhaps, but within a year or two.
National laws are needed to complete that program.
Individual or local or state effort alone cannot protect us in 1937 any better than ten years ago.
It will take time -- and plenty of time -- to work out our remedies administratively even after legislation is passed.
To complete our program of protection in time, therefore,
we cannot delay one moment in making certain that our national government has power to carry through.
Four years ago action did not come until the eleventh hour.
It was almost too late.
If we learned anything from the depression
we will not allow ourselves to run around in new circles of futile discussion and debate, always postponing the day of decision.
The American people have learned from the depression.
For in the last three national elections
an overwhelming majority of them voted a mandate that the Congress and the President begin the task of providing that protection
not after long years of debate, but now.
The courts, however, have cast doubts on the ability of the elected Congress to protect us against catastrophe
by meeting squarely our modern social and economic conditions.
We are at a crisis in our ability to proceed with that protection.
It is a quiet crisis. There are no lines of depositors outside closed banks.
But to the far-sighted it is far-reaching in its possibilities of injury to America.
I want to talk with you very simply about the need for present action in this crisis
the need to meet the unanswered challenge of one-third of a Nation ill-nourished, ill-clad, ill-housed.
Last Thursday I described the American form of government as a three horse team provided by the Constitution to the American people
so that their field might be plowed.
The three horses are, of course, the three branches of government -- the Congress, the Executive and the courts.
Two of the horses are pulling in unison today; the third is not.
Those who have intimated that the President of the United States is trying to drive that team
overlook the simple fact that the President, as Chief Executive, is himself one of the three horses.
It is the American people themselves who are in the driver's seat.
It is the American people themselves who want the furrow plowed.
It is the American people themselves who expect the third horse to pull in unison with the other two.
I hope that you have re-read the Constitution of the United States in these past few weeks.
Like the Bible, it ought to be read again and again.
It is an easy document to understand when you remember that it was called into being
because the Articles of Confederation under which the original thirteen States tried to operate after the Revolution
showed the need of a national government with power enough to handle national problems.
In its Preamble, the Constitution states that it was intended to form a more perfect Union and promote the general welfare;
and the powers given to the Congress to carry out those purposes can be best described by saying
that they were all the powers needed to meet each and every problem which then had a national character
and which could not be met by merely local action.
But the framers went further.
Having in mind that in succeeding generations many other problems then undreamed of would become national problems
they gave to the Congress the ample broad powers "to levy taxes
and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States.
That, my friends, is what I honestly believe
to have been the clear and underlying purpose of the patriots who wrote a federal constitution to create a national government
with national power, intended as they said, "to form a more perfect union
for ourselves and our posterity.
For nearly twenty years there was no conflict between the Congress and the Court.
Congress passed a statute which, in 1803, the Court said violated an express provision of the Constitution.
The Court claimed the power to declare it unconstitutional and did so declare it.
But a little later the Court itself admitted
that it was an extraordinary power to exercise and through Mr. Justice Washington laid down this limitation upon it:
It is but a decent respect due to the wisdom, the integrity and the patriotism of the legislative body,
by which any law is passed,
to presume in favor of its validity until its violation of the Constitution is proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
But since the rise of the modern movement for social and economic progress through legislation,
the Court has more and more often and more and more boldly
asserted a power to veto laws passed by the Congress and state legislatures in complete disregard of this original limitation.
In the last four years the sound rule of giving statutes the benefit of all reasonable doubt has been cast aside.
The Court has been acting not as a judicial body, but as a policy-making body.
When the Congress has sought to stabilize national agriculture, to improve the conditions of labor,
to safeguard business against unfair competition,
to protect our national resources, and in many other ways, to serve our clearly national needs,
the majority of the Court has been assuming the power to pass on the wisdom of these acts of the Congress
and to approve or disapprove the public policy written into these laws.
That is not only my accusation.
It is the accusation of most distinguished justices of the present Supreme Court.
I have not the time to quote to you all the language used by dissenting justices in many of these cases.
But in the case holding the Railroad Retirement Act unconstitutional, for instance,
Chief Justice Hughes said in a dissenting opinion that the majority opinion was "a departure from sound principles,"
and placed "an unwarranted limitation upon the commerce clause."
And three other justices agreed with him.
In the case of holding the A.A.A. unconstitutional,
Justice Stone said of the majority opinion that it was a "tortured construction of the Constitution."
And two other justices agreed with him.
In the case holding the New York Minimum Wage Law unconstitutional, Justice Stone said
that the majority were actually reading into the Constitution their own "personal economic predilections," and that
if the legislative power is not left free to choose the methods of solving the problems of poverty,
subsistence, and health of large numbers in the community, then
government is to be rendered impotent.
And two other justices agreed with him.
In the face of these dissenting opinions, there is no basis for the claim made by some members of the Court
that something in the Constitution has compelled them regretfully to thwart the will of the people.
In the face of such dissenting opinions, it is perfectly clear that, as Chief Justice Hughes has said,
We are under a Constitution, but the Constitution is what the judges say it is.
The Court in addition to the proper use of its judicial functions has improperly set itself up as a third house of the Congress
a super-legislature, as one of the justices has called it
reading into the Constitution words and implications which are not there, and which were never intended to be there.
We have, therefore,
reached the point as a nation where we must take action to save the Constitution from the Court and the Court from itself.
We must find a way to take an appeal from the Supreme Court to the Constitution itself.
We want a Supreme Court which will do justice under the Constitution -- not over it.
In our courts we want a government of laws and not of men.
I want -- as all Americans want -- an independent judiciary as proposed by the framers of the Constitution.
That means a Supreme Court that will enforce the Constitution as written
that will refuse to amend the Constitution by the arbitrary exercise of judicial power -- amended by judicial say-so.
It does not mean a judiciary so independent that it can deny the existence of facts which are universally recognized.
How then could we proceed to perform the mandate given us?
It was said in last year's Democratic platform,
If these problems cannot be effectively solved within the Constitution,
we shall seek such clarifying amendment as will assure the power to enact those laws,
adequately to regulate commerce, protect public health and safety, and safeguard economic security.
In other words, we said we would seek an amendment only if every other possible means by legislation were to fail.
When I commenced to review the situation with the problem squarely before me,
I came by a process of elimination to the conclusion that, short of amendments,
the only method which was clearly constitutional, and would at the same time carry out other much needed reforms,
was to infuse new blood into all our courts.
We must have men worthy and equipped to carry out impartial justice.
But, at the same time, we must have judges who will bring to the courts a present-day sense of the Constitution
judges who will retain in the courts the judicial functions of a court,
and reject the legislative powers which the courts have today assumed.
In forty-five out of the forty-eight states of the Union, judges are chosen not for life but for a period of years.
In many states judges must retire at the age of seventy.
Congress has provided financial security
by offering life pensions at full pay for federal judges on all courts who are willing to retire at seventy.
In the case of Supreme Court justices, that pension is $20,000 a year.
But all federal judges, once appointed,
can, if they choose, hold office for life, no matter how old they may get to be.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt
Section 10. March 9, 1937. Part 2.
What is my proposal?
It is simply this: whenever a judge or justice of any federal court
has reached the age of seventy and does not avail himself of the opportunity to retire on a pension,
a new member shall be appointed by the President then in office,
with the approval, as required by the Constitution, of the Senate of the United States.
That plan has two chief purposes.
By bringing into the judicial system a steady and continuing stream of new and younger blood, I hope, first,
to make the administration of all federal justice speedier and, therefore, less costly;
secondly, to bring to the decision of social and economic problems younger men who have had personal experience and contact
with modern facts and circumstances under which average men have to live and work.
This plan will save our national Constitution from hardening of the judicial arteries.
The number of judges to be appointed would depend wholly on the decision of present judges now over seventy,
or those who would subsequently reach the age of seventy.
If, for instance, any one of the six justices of the Supreme Court now over the age of seventy should retire as provided under the plan,
no additional place would be created.
Consequently, although there never can be more than fifteen, there may be only fourteen, or thirteen, or twelve.
And there may be only nine.
There is nothing novel or radical about this idea.
It seeks to maintain the federal bench in full vigor.
It has been discussed and approved by many persons of high authority
ever since a similar proposal passed the House of Representatives in 1869.
Why was the age fixed at seventy?
Because the laws of many states, the practice of the Civil Service, the regulations of the Army and Navy,
and the rules of many of our universities and of almost every great private business enterprise,
commonly fix the retirement age at seventy years or less.
The statute would apply to all the courts in the federal system.
There is general approval so far as the lower federal courts are concerned.
The plan has met opposition only so far as the Supreme Court of the United States itself is concerned.
If such a plan is good for the lower courts it certainly ought to be equally good for the highest court from which there is no appeal.
Those opposing this plan have sought to arouse prejudice and fear by crying that I am seeking to "pack" the Supreme Court
and that a baneful precedent will be established.
What do they mean by the words "packing the Court"?
Let me answer this question with a bluntness that will end all honest misunderstanding of my purposes.
If by that phrase "packing the Court" it is charged that I wish to place on the bench spineless puppets
who would disregard the law and would decide specific cases as I wished them to be decided, I make this answer:
that no President fit for his office would appoint,
and no Senate of honorable men fit for their office would confirm, that kind of appointees to the Supreme Court.
But if by that phrase the charge is made
that I would appoint and the Senate would confirm justices worthy to sit beside present members of the Court
who understand those modern conditions,
that I will appoint justices who will not undertake to override the judgment of the Congress on legislative policy,
that I will appoint justices who will act as justices and not as legislators
if the appointment of such justices can be called "packing the Courts,"
then I say that I and with me the vast majority of the American people favor doing just that thing -- now.
Is it a dangerous precedent for the Congress to change the number of the justices? The Congress has always had, and will have, that power.
The number of justices has been changed several times before,
in the administration of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson -- both signers of the Declaration of Independence
Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses S. Grant.
I suggest only the addition of justices to the bench
in accordance with a clearly defined principle relating to a clearly defined age limit.
Fundamentally, if in the future, America cannot trust the Congress it elects to refrain from abuse of our Constitutional usages
democracy will have failed far beyond the importance to it of any king of precedent concerning the judiciary.
We think it so much in the public interest to maintain a vigorous judiciary
that we encourage the retirement of elderly judges by offering them a life pension at full salary.
Why then should we leave the fulfillment of this public policy to chance
or make independent on upon the desire or prejudice of any individual justice?
It is the clear intention of our public policy to provide for a constant flow of new and younger blood into the judiciary.
Normally every President appoints a large number of district and circuit court judges and a few members of the Supreme Court.
Until my first term practically every President of the United States has appointed at least one member of the Supreme Court.
President Taft appointed five members and named a Chief Justice;
President Wilson, three; President Harding, four, including a Chief Justice; President Coolidge, one;
President Hoover, three, including a Chief Justice.
Such a succession of appointments should have provided a Court well-balanced as to age.
But chance and the disinclination of individuals to leave the Supreme bench
have now given us a Court in which five justices will be over seventy-five years of age before next June
and one over seventy.
Thus a sound public policy has been defeated.
I now propose that we establish by law an assurance against any such ill-balanced court in the future.
I propose that hereafter, when a judge reaches the age of seventy,
a new and younger judge shall be added to the court automatically.
In this way I propose to enforce a sound public policy by law
instead of leaving the composition of our federal courts, including the highest,
to be determined by chance or the personal indecision of individuals.
If such a law as I propose is regarded as establishing a new precedent,
is it not a most desirable precedent?
Like all lawyers, like all Americans, I regret the necessity of this controversy.
But the welfare of the United States, and indeed of the Constitution itself, is what we all must think about first.
Our difficulty with the Court today rises not from the Court as an institution but from human beings within it.
But we cannot yield our constitutional destiny to the personal judgment of a few men who, being fearful of the future,
would deny us the necessary means of dealing with the present.
This plan of mine is no attack on the Court;
it seeks to restore the Court to its rightful and historic place in our constitutional government
and to have it resume its high task of building anew on the Constitution "a system of living law."
The Court itself can best undo what the Court has done.
I have thus explained to you the reasons that lie behind our efforts to secure results by legislation within the Constitution.
I hope that thereby the difficult process of constitutional amendment may be rendered unnecessary. But,
let us examine the process.
There are many types of amendment proposed.
Each one is radically different from the other.
There is no substantial groups within the Congress or outside it who are agreed on any single amendment.
It would take months or years to get substantial agreement upon the type and language of the amendment.
It would take months and years thereafter to get a two-thirds majority in favor of that amendment in both Houses of the Congress.
Then would come the long course of ratification by three-fourths of all the states.
No amendment which any powerful economic interests or the leaders of any powerful political party have had reason to oppose
has ever been ratified within anything like a reasonable time.
And thirteen states which contain only five percent of the voting population can block ratification
even though the thirty- five states with ninety-five percent of the population are in favor of it.
A very large percentage of newspaper publishers, Chambers of Commerce,
Bar Association, Manufacturers' Associations, who are trying to give the impression that they really do want a constitutional amendment
would be the first to exclaim as soon as an amendment was proposed
Oh! I was for an amendment all right, but this amendment you proposed is not the kind of amendment that I was thinking about.
I am therefore, going to spend my time, my efforts and my money
to block the amendment, although I would be awfully glad to help get some other kind of amendment ratified.
Two groups oppose my plan on the ground that they favor a constitutional amendment.
The first includes those who fundamentally object to social and economic legislation along modern lines.
This is the same group who during the campaign last Fall tried to block the mandate of the people.
Now they are making a last stand.
And the strategy of that last stand is to suggest the time-consuming process of amendment in order to kill off by delay
the legislation demanded by the mandate.
To them I say: I do not think you will be able long to fool the American people as to your purposes.
The other groups is composed of those who honestly believe the amendment process is the best
and who would be willing to support a reasonable amendment if they could agree on one.
To them I say: we cannot rely on an amendment as the immediate or only answer to our present difficulties.
When the time comes for action,
you will find that many of those who pretend to support you will sabotage any constructive amendment which is proposed.
Look at these strange bed-fellows of yours.
When before have you found them really at your side in your fights for progress?
And remember one thing more.
Even if an amendment were passed, and even if in the years to come it were to be ratified,
its meaning would depend upon the kind of justices who would be sitting on the Supreme Court bench.
An amendment, like the rest of the Constitution,
is what the justices say it is rather than what its framers or you might hope it is.
This proposal of mine will not infringe in the slightest upon the civil or religious liberties so dear to every American.
My record as Governor and President proves my devotion to those liberties.
You who know me can have no fear that I would tolerate the destruction by any branch of government of any part of our heritage of freedom.
The present attempt by those opposed to progress to play upon the fears of danger to personal liberty
brings again to mind that crude and cruel strategy tried by the same opposition
to frighten the workers of America in a pay-envelope propaganda against the Social Security Law.
The workers were not fooled by that propaganda then. The people of America will not be fooled by such propaganda now.
I am in favor of action through legislation:
First, because I believe that it can be passed at this session of the Congress.
Second, because it will provide a reinvigorated
liberal-minded judiciary necessary to furnish quicker and cheaper justice from bottom to top.
Third, because it will provide a series of federal courts willing to enforce the Constitution as written,
and unwilling to assert legislative powers by writing into it their own political and economic policies.
During the past half century the balance of power between the three great branches of the federal government,
has been tipped out of balance by the courts in direct contradiction of the high purposes of the framers of the Constitution.
It is my purpose to restore that balance.
You who know me will accept my solemn assurance that in a world in which democracy is under attack,
I seek to make American democracy succeed.
You and I will do our part.
The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5.
Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. Biology. Chapter 7. Organic Functions. Part One.
The facts dealing with the physiology of organisms, the activities associated with that which we call life
are often designated Organic Functions.
The terms animal physiology, plant physiology and human physiology are in common use and often suggest to the lay reader
that the functions or workings of the organs of plants, animals or man are quite distinct,
so much so as to require discussion in different treatises.
This is true only as a matter of detail,
for in the past fifty years it has been made evident that in general principles all living things are fundamentally similar.
One of the most important summaries of this similarity
is Huxley's famous essay, "The Border Territory Between the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms," written in 1876,
extracts from which follow.
In the second edition of the "Regne Animal," published in 1828,
Cuvier devotes a special section to the Division of Organized Beings into Animals and Vegetables,
in which the question is treated with that comprehensiveness of knowledge and clear critical judgment which characterize his writings
and justify biologists in regarding them as representative expressions of the most extensive, if not the profoundest, knowledge of his time.
He affirms that living beings have been subdivided from the earliest times into animated beings, which possess sense and motion,
and inanimated beings, which are devoid of these functions and simply vegetable.
Although the roots of plants direct themselves toward moisture and their leaves toward air and light,
although the parts of some plants exhibit oscillating movements without any perceptible cause and the leaves of others retract when touched,
yet none of these movements justify the ascription to plants of perception of will.
From the mobility of animals Cuvier, with his characteristic partiality for teleological reasoning,
reduces the necessity of the existence in them of an alimentary cavity, or reservoir of food,
whence their nutrition may be drawn by vessels, which are a sort of internal roots; and, in the presence of this alimentary cavity
he naturally sees the primary and the most important distinction between animals and plants,
Following out his teleological argument, Cuvier remarks that the organization of this cavity
and its appurtenances must needs vary according to the nature of the aliment and the operations which it has to undergo
before it can be converted into substances fitted for absorption,
while the atmosphere and the earth supply plants with juices ready prepared and which can be absorbed immediately.
As the animal body required to be independent of heat and of the atmosphere,
there were no means by which the motion of its fluids could be produced by internal causes.
Hence arose the second great distinctive character of animals, or the circulatory system, which is less important than the digestive,
since it was unnecessary, and therefore is absent, in the more simple animals.
Animals further needed muscles for locomotion and nerves for sensibility.
Hence, says Cuvier, it was necessary that the chemical composition of the animal body should be more complicated than that of the plant;
and it is so, inasmuch as an additional substance -- nitrogen -- enters into it as an essential element;
while in plants nitrogen is only accidentally joined with the three other fundamental constituents of organic beings
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
he afterward affirms that nitrogen is peculiar to animals, and herein he places the third distinction between the animal and the plant.
The soil and the atmosphere supply plants with water composed of hydrogen and oxygen
and carbonic acid containing carbon and oxygen.
They retain the hydrogen and the carbon, exhale the superfluous oxygen and absorb little or no nitrogen.
The essential character of vegetable life is the exhalation of oxygen, which is effected through the agency of light.
Animals, on the contrary, derive their nourishment either directly or indirectly from plants.
They get rid of the superfluous hydrogen and carbon and accumulate nitrogen.
The relations of plants and animals to the atmosphere are therefore inverse.
The plant withdraws water and carbonic acid from the atmosphere, the animal contributes both to it.
Respiration -- that is, the absorption of oxygen and the exhalation of carbonic acid
is the specially animal function of animals and constitutes their fourth distinctive character.
Thus wrote Cuvier in 1828.
But in the fourth and fifth decades of this century
the greatest and most rapid revolution which biological science has ever undergone was effected by the application of the modern microscope
to the investigation of organic structure,
by the introduction of exact and easily manageable methods of conducting the chemical analysis of organic compounds and finally
by the employment of instruments of precision for the measurement of the physical forces which are at work in the living economy.
That the semi-fluid contents (which we now term protoplasm) of the cells of certain plants,
such as the Charae, are in constant and regular motion was made out by Bonaventura Corti a century ago;
but the fact, important as it was, fell into oblivion and had to be rediscovered by Treviranus in 1807.
Robert Brown noted the more complex motions of the protoplasm in the cells of Tradescantia in 1831,
and now such movements of the living substance of plants are well known to be some of the most widely prevalent phenomena of vegetable life.
Agardh and other of the botanists of Cuvier's generation who occupied themselves with the lower plants had observed that,
under particular circumstances, the contents of the cells of certain water-weeds were set free and moved about with considerable velocity
and with all the appearances of spontaneity as locomotive bodies,
which, from their similarity to animals of simple organization, were called "zoospores."
Even as late as 1845, however, a botanist of Schleiden's eminence dealt very skeptically with these statements,
and his skepticism was the more justified since Ehrenberg in his elaborate and comprehensive work on the infusoria,
had declared the greater number of what are now recognized as locomotive plants to be animals.
At the present day," writes Huxley,|"At the present day," writes Huxley, LJ025-0069|innumerable plants and free plant cells are known to pass the whole or part of their lives in an actively locomotive condition,|innumerable plants and free plant cells are known to pass the whole or part of their lives in an actively locomotive condition, LJ025-0070|in nowise distinguishable from that of one of the simpler animals, and|in nowise distinguishable from that of one of the simpler animals, and LJ025-0071|while in this condition their movements are, to all appearances, as spontaneous -- as much the product of volition -- as those of such animals.|while in this condition their movements are, to all appearances, as spontaneous -- as much the product of volition -- as those of such animals. LJ025-0072|Hence the teleological argument for Cuvier's first diagnostic character|Hence the teleological argument for Cuvier's first diagnostic character LJ025-0073|the presence in animals of an alimentary cavity, or internal pocket, in which they can carry about their nutriment|the presence in animals of an alimentary cavity, or internal pocket, in which they can carry about their nutriment LJ025-0074|has broken down, so far, at least, as his mode of stating it goes. And|has broken down, so far, at least, as his mode of stating it goes. And LJ025-0075|with the advance of microscopic anatomy, the universality of the fact itself among animals has ceased to be predicable.|with the advance of microscopic anatomy, the universality of the fact itself among animals has ceased to be predicable. LJ025-0076|Many animals of even complex structure which live parasitically within others are wholly devoid of an alimentary cavity.|Many animals of even complex structure which live parasitically within others are wholly devoid of an alimentary cavity. LJ025-0077|Their food is provided for them,|Their food is provided for them, LJ025-0078|not only ready cooked but ready digested, and the alimentary canal, become superfluous, has disappeared, and, again,|not only ready cooked but ready digested, and the alimentary canal, become superfluous, has disappeared, and, again, LJ025-0079|the males of most Rotifers have no digestive apparatus.|the males of most Rotifers have no digestive apparatus. LJ025-0080|Finally amid the lowest forms of animal life the speck of gelatinous protoplasm, which constitutes the whole body,|Finally amid the lowest forms of animal life the speck of gelatinous protoplasm, which constitutes the whole body, LJ025-0081|has no permanent digestive cavity or mouth, but takes in its food anywhere and digests, so to speak, all over its body.|has no permanent digestive cavity or mouth, but takes in its food anywhere and digests, so to speak, all over its body. LJ025-0082|But although Cuvier's leading diagnosis of the animal from the plant will not stand a strict test,|But although Cuvier's leading diagnosis of the animal from the plant will not stand a strict test, LJ025-0083|it remains one of the most constant of the distinctive characters of animals.|it remains one of the most constant of the distinctive characters of animals. LJ025-0084|And if we substitute for the possession of an alimentary cavity the power of taking solid nutriment into the body and there digesting it,|And if we substitute for the possession of an alimentary cavity the power of taking solid nutriment into the body and there digesting it, LJ025-0085|the definition so changed will cover all animals, except certain parasites,|the definition so changed will cover all animals, except certain parasites, LJ025-0086|and the few and exceptional cases of non-parasitic animals which do not feed at all.|and the few and exceptional cases of non-parasitic animals which do not feed at all. LJ025-0087|On the other hand, the definition thus amended will exclude all ordinary vegetable organisms.|On the other hand, the definition thus amended will exclude all ordinary vegetable organisms. LJ025-0088|Cuvier himself practically gives up his second distinctive mark when he admits that it is wanting in the simpler animals.|Cuvier himself practically gives up his second distinctive mark when he admits that it is wanting in the simpler animals. LJ025-0089|The third distinction is based on a completely erroneous conception of the chemical differences|The third distinction is based on a completely erroneous conception of the chemical differences LJ025-0090|and resemblances between the constituents of animal and vegetable organisms, for which Cuvier is not responsible,|and resemblances between the constituents of animal and vegetable organisms, for which Cuvier is not responsible, LJ025-0091|as it was current among contemporary chemists.|as it was current among contemporary chemists. LJ025-0092|It is now established that nitrogen is as essential a constituent of vegetable as of animal living matter|It is now established that nitrogen is as essential a constituent of vegetable as of animal living matter LJ025-0093|and that the latter is, chemically speaking, just as complicated as the former.|and that the latter is, chemically speaking, just as complicated as the former. LJ025-0094|Starchy substances, cellulose and sugar,|Starchy substances, cellulose and sugar, LJ025-0095|once supposed to be exclusively confined to plants, are now known to be regular and normal products of animals.|once supposed to be exclusively confined to plants, are now known to be regular and normal products of animals. LJ025-0096|Amylaceous and saccharine substances are largely manufactured, even by the highest animals.|Amylaceous and saccharine substances are largely manufactured, even by the highest animals. LJ025-0097|Cellulose is widespread as a constituent of the skeletons of the lower animals|Cellulose is widespread as a constituent of the skeletons of the lower animals LJ025-0098|and it is probable that amyloid substances are universally present in the animal organism, though not in the precise form of starch.|and it is probable that amyloid substances are universally present in the animal organism, though not in the precise form of starch. LJ025-0099|Moreover, although it remains true that there is an inverse relation between the green plant in sunshine and the animal,|Moreover, although it remains true that there is an inverse relation between the green plant in sunshine and the animal, LJ025-0100|in so far as under these circumstances the green plant|in so far as under these circumstances the green plant LJ025-0101|decomposes carbonic acid and exhales oxygen while the animal absorbs oxygen and exhales carbonic acid,|decomposes carbonic acid and exhales oxygen while the animal absorbs oxygen and exhales carbonic acid, LJ025-0102|yet the exact researches of the modern chemical investigators of the physiological processes of plants have clearly demonstrated the fallacy|yet the exact researches of the modern chemical investigators of the physiological processes of plants have clearly demonstrated the fallacy LJ025-0103|of attempting to draw any general distinction between animals and vegetables on this ground. In fact, the difference vanishes with the sunshine,|of attempting to draw any general distinction between animals and vegetables on this ground. In fact, the difference vanishes with the sunshine, LJ025-0104|even in the case of the green plant, which in the dark absorbs oxygen and gives out carbonic acid like any animal.|even in the case of the green plant, which in the dark absorbs oxygen and gives out carbonic acid like any animal. LJ025-0105|On the other hand, those plants, such as the fungi,|On the other hand, those plants, such as the fungi, LJ025-0106|which contain no chlorophyll and are not green, are always, so far as respiration is concerned, in the exact position of animals.|which contain no chlorophyll and are not green, are always, so far as respiration is concerned, in the exact position of animals. LJ025-0107|They absorb oxygen and give out carbonic acid.|They absorb oxygen and give out carbonic acid. LJ025-0108|Thus, by the progress of knowledge, Cuvier's fourth distinction between the animal and the plant|Thus, by the progress of knowledge, Cuvier's fourth distinction between the animal and the plant LJ025-0109|has been as completely invalidated as the third and second, and even the first can be retained only in a modified form|has been as completely invalidated as the third and second, and even the first can be retained only in a modified form LJ025-0110|and subject to exceptions.|and subject to exceptions. LJ025-0111|But has the advance of biology simply tended to break down old distinctions without establishing new ones?|But has the advance of biology simply tended to break down old distinctions without establishing new ones? LJ025-0112|With a qualification, to be considered presently, the answer to this question is undoubtedly in the affirmative.|With a qualification, to be considered presently, the answer to this question is undoubtedly in the affirmative. LJ025-0113|The famous researches of Schwann and Schleiden in 1837 and the following years|The famous researches of Schwann and Schleiden in eighteen thirty-seven and the following years LJ025-0114|founded the modern science of histology or that branch of anatomy which deals with the ultimate visible structure of organisms as revealed by the microscope,|founded the modern science of histology or that branch of anatomy which deals with the ultimate visible structure of organisms as revealed by the microscope, LJ025-0115|and from that day to this the rapid improvement of methods of investigation and the energy of a host of accurate observers|and from that day to this the rapid improvement of methods of investigation and the energy of a host of accurate observers LJ025-0116|have given greater and greater breadth and firmness to Schwann's great generalization|have given greater and greater breadth and firmness to Schwann's great generalization LJ025-0117|that a fundamental unity of structure obtains in animals and plants,|that a fundamental unity of structure obtains in animals and plants, LJ025-0118|and that, however diverse may be the fabrics or tissues of which their bodies are composed, all these varied structures result|and that, however diverse may be the fabrics or tissues of which their bodies are composed, all these varied structures result LJ025-0119|from the metamorphosis of morphological units (termed cells in a more general sense than that in which the word "cells" was at first employed),|from the metamorphosis of morphological units (termed cells in a more general sense than that in which the word "cells" was at first employed), LJ025-0120|which are not only similar in animals and in plants respectively,|which are not only similar in animals and in plants respectively, LJ025-0121|but present a close resemblance when those of animals and those of plants are compared together.|but present a close resemblance when those of animals and those of plants are compared together. LJ025-0122|The contractility which is the fundamental condition of locomotion," continues Huxley,|The contractility which is the fundamental condition of locomotion," continues Huxley, LJ025-0123|has not only been discovered to exist far more widely among plants than was formerly imagined,|has not only been discovered to exist far more widely among plants than was formerly imagined, LJ025-0124|but in the plants the act of contraction has been found to be accompanied,|but in the plants the act of contraction has been found to be accompanied, LJ025-0125|as Dr. Burdon Sanderson's interesting investigations have shown, by a disturbance of the electrical state of the contractile substance|as Dr. Burdon Sanderson's interesting investigations have shown, by a disturbance of the electrical state of the contractile substance LJ025-0126|comparable to that which was found by Du Bois Reymond to be a concomitant of the activity of ordinary muscle in animals. Again,|comparable to that which was found by Du Bois Reymond to be a concomitant of the activity of ordinary muscle in animals. Again, LJ025-0127|I know of no test by which the reaction of the leaves of the Sundew and of other plants to stimuli, so fully and carefully studied by Mr. Darwin,|I know of no test by which the reaction of the leaves of the Sundew and of other plants to stimuli, so fully and carefully studied by Mr. Darwin, LJ025-0128|can be distinguished from those acts of contraction following upon stimuli, which are called "reflex" in animals.|can be distinguished from those acts of contraction following upon stimuli, which are called "reflex" in animals. LJ025-0129|On each lobe of the bi-lobed leaf of Venus flytrap are three delicate filaments which stand out at right angles from the surface of the leaf.|On each lobe of the bi-lobed leaf of Venus flytrap are three delicate filaments which stand out at right angles from the surface of the leaf. LJ025-0130|Touch one of them with the end of a fine human hair|Touch one of them with the end of a fine human hair LJ025-0131|and the lobes of the leaf instantly close together in virtue of an act of contraction of part of their substance,|and the lobes of the leaf instantly close together in virtue of an act of contraction of part of their substance, LJ025-0132|just as the body of a snail contracts into its shell when one of its "horns" is irritated.|just as the body of a snail contracts into its shell when one of its "horns" is irritated. LJ025-0133|The reflex action of the snail is the result of the presence of a nervous system in the animal.|The reflex action of the snail is the result of the presence of a nervous system in the animal. LJ025-0134|A molecular change takes place in the nerve of the tentacle,|A molecular change takes place in the nerve of the tentacle, LJ025-0135|is propagated to the muscles by which the body is retracted, and causing them to contract, the act of retraction is brought about.|is propagated to the muscles by which the body is retracted, and causing them to contract, the act of retraction is brought about. LJ025-0136|Of course the similarity of the acts does not necessarily involve the conclusion that the mechanism by which they are effected is the same|Of course the similarity of the acts does not necessarily involve the conclusion that the mechanism by which they are effected is the same LJ025-0137|but it suggests a suspicion of their identity which needs careful testing.|but it suggests a suspicion of their identity which needs careful testing. LJ025-0138|The results of inquiries into the structure of the nervous system of animals|The results of inquiries into the structure of the nervous system of animals LJ025-0139|converge toward the conclusion that the nerve fibers, which have been regarded as ultimate elements of nervous tissue,|converge toward the conclusion that the nerve fibers, which have been regarded as ultimate elements of nervous tissue, LJ025-0140|are not such, but are simply the visible aggregations of vastly more attenuated filaments,|are not such, but are simply the visible aggregations of vastly more attenuated filaments, LJ025-0141|the diameter of which dwindles down to the limits of our present microscopic vision,|the diameter of which dwindles down to the limits of our present microscopic vision, LJ025-0142|greatly as these have been extended by modern improvements of the microscope, and that a nerve is, in its essence,|greatly as these have been extended by modern improvements of the microscope, and that a nerve is, in its essence, LJ025-0143|nothing but a linear tract of specially modified protoplasm between two points of an organism|nothing but a linear tract of specially modified protoplasm between two points of an organism LJ025-0144|one of which is able to affect the other by means of the communication so established.|one of which is able to affect the other by means of the communication so established. LJ025-0145|Hence it is conceivable that even the simplest living being may possess a nervous system.|Hence it is conceivable that even the simplest living being may possess a nervous system. LJ025-0146|And the question whether plants are provided with a nervous system or not thus acquires a new aspect and presents the histologist and physiologist|And the question whether plants are provided with a nervous system or not thus acquires a new aspect and presents the histologist and physiologist LJ025-0147|with a problem of extreme difficulty, which must be attacked from a new point of view and by the aid of methods which have yet to be invented.|with a problem of extreme difficulty, which must be attacked from a new point of view and by the aid of methods which have yet to be invented. LJ025-0148|"Thus it must be admitted," he says again, "that plants may be contractile and locomotive;|"Thus it must be admitted," he says again, "that plants may be contractile and locomotive; LJ025-0149|that, while locomotive, their movements may have as much appearance of spontaneity as those of the lowest animals,|that, while locomotive, their movements may have as much appearance of spontaneity as those of the lowest animals, LJ025-0150|and that many exhibit actions comparable to those which are brought about by the agency of a nervous system in animals.|and that many exhibit actions comparable to those which are brought about by the agency of a nervous system in animals. LJ025-0151|And it must be allowed to be possible that further research may reveal the existence of something comparable to a nervous system in plants.|And it must be allowed to be possible that further research may reveal the existence of something comparable to a nervous system in plants. LJ025-0152|So that I know not where we can hope to find any absolute distinction between animals and plants, unless we return to their mode of nutrition|So that I know not where we can hope to find any absolute distinction between animals and plants, unless we return to their mode of nutrition LJ025-0153|and inquire whether certain differences of a more occult character than those imagined to exist by Cuvier,|and inquire whether certain differences of a more occult character than those imagined to exist by Cuvier, LJ025-0154|and which certainly hold good for the vast majority of animals and plants, are of universal application.|and which certainly hold good for the vast majority of animals and plants, are of universal application. LJ025-0155|A bean may be supplied with water in which salts of ammonia and certain other mineral salts are dissolved in due proportion,|A bean may be supplied with water in which salts of ammonia and certain other mineral salts are dissolved in due proportion, LJ025-0156|with atmospheric air containing its ordinary minute dose of carbonic acid and with nothing else but sunlight and heat.|with atmospheric air containing its ordinary minute dose of carbonic acid and with nothing else but sunlight and heat. LJ025-0157|Under these circumstances, unnatural as they are, with proper management, the bean will thrust forth its radicle and its plumule;|Under these circumstances, unnatural as they are, with proper management, the bean will thrust forth its radicle and its plumule; LJ025-0158|the former will grow down into roots, the latter grow up into the stem and leaves of a vigorous bean-plant,|the former will grow down into roots, the latter grow up into the stem and leaves of a vigorous bean-plant, LJ025-0159|and this plant will, in due time, flower and produce its crop of beans just as if it were grown in the garden or in the field.|and this plant will, in due time, flower and produce its crop of beans just as if it were grown in the garden or in the field. LJ025-0160|The weight of the nitrogenous protein compounds,|The weight of the nitrogenous protein compounds, LJ025-0161|of the oily, starchy, saccharine and woody substances contained in the full-grown plant and its seeds|of the oily, starchy, saccharine and woody substances contained in the full-grown plant and its seeds LJ025-0162|will be vastly greater than the weight of the same substances contained in the bean from which it sprang.|will be vastly greater than the weight of the same substances contained in the bean from which it sprang. LJ025-0163|But nothing has been supplied to the bean save water, carbonic acid, ammonia, potash, lime,|But nothing has been supplied to the bean save water, carbonic acid, ammonia, potash, lime, LJ025-0164|iron and the like in combination with phosphoric, sulphuric and other acids.|iron and the like in combination with phosphoric, sulphuric and other acids. LJ025-0165|Neither protein, nor fat, nor starch, nor sugar, nor any substance in the slightest degree resembling them has formed part of the food of the bean.|Neither protein, nor fat, nor starch, nor sugar, nor any substance in the slightest degree resembling them has formed part of the food of the bean. LJ025-0166|But the weights of the carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur and other elementary bodies contained in the bean-plant|But the weights of the carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur and other elementary bodies contained in the bean-plant LJ025-0167|and in the seeds which it produces are exactly equivalent to the weights of the same elements which have disappeared from the materials supplied to the bean during its growth.|and in the seeds which it produces are exactly equivalent to the weights of the same elements which have disappeared from the materials supplied to the bean during its growth. LJ025-0168|Whence it follows that the bean has taken in only the raw materials of its fabric and has manufactured them into bean-stuffs.|Whence it follows that the bean has taken in only the raw materials of its fabric and has manufactured them into bean-stuffs. LJ025-0169|The bean has been able to perform this great chemical feat by the help of its green coloring matter, or chlorophyll,|The bean has been able to perform this great chemical feat by the help of its green coloring matter, or chlorophyll, LJ025-0170|for it is only the green parts of the plant which, under the influence of sunlight, have the marvelous power of decomposing carbonic acid,|for it is only the green parts of the plant which, under the influence of sunlight, have the marvelous power of decomposing carbonic acid, LJ025-0171|setting free the oxygen and laying hold of the carbon which it contains.|setting free the oxygen and laying hold of the carbon which it contains. LJ025-0172|In fact, the bean obtains two of the absolutely indispensable elements of its substance from two distinct sources.|In fact, the bean obtains two of the absolutely indispensable elements of its substance from two distinct sources. LJ025-0173|The watery solution, in which its roots are plunged, contains nitrogen but no carbon;|The watery solution, in which its roots are plunged, contains nitrogen but no carbon; LJ025-0174|the air, to which the leaves are exposed, contains carbon,|the air, to which the leaves are exposed, contains carbon, LJ025-0175|but its nitrogen is in the state of a free gas, in which condition the bean can make no use of it,|but its nitrogen is in the state of a free gas, in which condition the bean can make no use of it, LJ025-0176|and the chlorophyll is the apparatus by which the carbon is extracted from the atmospheric carbonic acid, the leaves being the chief laboratories|and the chlorophyll is the apparatus by which the carbon is extracted from the atmospheric carbonic acid, the leaves being the chief laboratories LJ026-0001|The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. Biology. Chapter 8.|The Science: History of the Universe, Volume five. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. Biology. Chapter eight. LJ026-0002|Life Processes. Part One.|Life Processes. Part One. LJ026-0003|Nutrition thus, as has been pointed out, makes it possible to classify most organisms as animals or plants.|Nutrition thus, as has been pointed out, makes it possible to classify most organisms as animals or plants. LJ026-0004|Yet there are many unicellular forms in which both kinds of nutrition go on at the same time;|Yet there are many unicellular forms in which both kinds of nutrition go on at the same time; LJ026-0005|that is, the forms may possess a mouth for the ingestion of solid food and green coloring matter, chlorophyll,|that is, the forms may possess a mouth for the ingestion of solid food and green coloring matter, chlorophyll, LJ026-0006|for the manufacture of starchy food from gaseous matter.|for the manufacture of starchy food from gaseous matter. LJ026-0007|Many of the lowest forms of life have long been puzzles|Many of the lowest forms of life have long been puzzles LJ026-0008|and the beginner in biological study is surprised to find them described in textbooks of both botany and zoology.|and the beginner in biological study is surprised to find them described in textbooks of both botany and zoology. LJ026-0009|The fact is that they are on the border line, are neither plants nor animals but simply organisms.|The fact is that they are on the border line, are neither plants nor animals but simply organisms. LJ026-0010|Since they cannot be classified, it is necessary that they be listed both under botany and zoology, in order to make sure that they will not be omitted entirely.|Since they cannot be classified, it is necessary that they be listed both under botany and zoology, in order to make sure that they will not be omitted entirely. LJ026-0011|Because of these uncertain forms of life,|Because of these uncertain forms of life, LJ026-0012|Haeckel proposed once to include all one-celled animals and plants in a third kingdom to be called Protista (meaning the first of all life).|Haeckel proposed once to include all one-celled animals and plants in a third kingdom to be called Protista (meaning the first of all life). LJ026-0013|Parker's definition of animals and plants,|Parker's definition of animals and plants, LJ026-0014|based on the foregoing considerations, is convenient for distinguishing between animals and plants in all cases except the doubtful unicellar forms.|based on the foregoing considerations, is convenient for distinguishing between animals and plants in all cases except the doubtful unicellar forms. LJ026-0015|He says: Animals are organisms of fixed and definite form, in which the cell-body is not covered with a cellulose wall.|He says: Animals are organisms of fixed and definite form, in which the cell-body is not covered with a cellulose wall. LJ026-0016|They ingest solid proteinaceous food,|They ingest solid proteinaceous food, LJ026-0017|their nutritive processes result in oxidation, they have a definite organ of excretion and are capable of automatic movement|their nutritive processes result in oxidation, they have a definite organ of excretion and are capable of automatic movement LJ026-0018|Plants are organisms of constantly varying form in which the cell body is surrounded by a cellulose wall;|Plants are organisms of constantly varying form in which the cell body is surrounded by a cellulose wall; LJ026-0019|they cannot ingest solid food, but are nourished by a watery solution of nutrient materials.|they cannot ingest solid food, but are nourished by a watery solution of nutrient materials. LJ026-0020|If chlorophyll is present, the carbon dioxide of the air serves as a source of carbon,|If chlorophyll is present, the carbon dioxide of the air serves as a source of carbon, LJ026-0021|nitrogen is obtained from simple salts and the nutritive processes result in deoxidation;|nitrogen is obtained from simple salts and the nutritive processes result in deoxidation; LJ026-0022|if chlorophyll is absent, carbon is obtained from sugar or some similar compound,|if chlorophyll is absent, carbon is obtained from sugar or some similar compound, LJ026-0023|nitrogen either from simple salts or from proteids, and the process of nutrition is one of oxidation.|nitrogen either from simple salts or from proteids, and the process of nutrition is one of oxidation. LJ026-0024|There is no special excretory organ, and, except in the case of certain reproductive bodies, there is usually no locomotion.|There is no special excretory organ, and, except in the case of certain reproductive bodies, there is usually no locomotion. LJ026-0025|The important point to recognize is that these boundaries are artificial and that there are no scientific frontiers in Nature.|The important point to recognize is that these boundaries are artificial and that there are no scientific frontiers in Nature. LJ026-0026|As in the liquefaction of gases, there is a "critical point" at which the substance under experiment is neither gaseous nor liquid.|As in the liquefaction of gases, there is a "critical point" at which the substance under experiment is neither gaseous nor liquid. LJ026-0027|as in a mountainous country, it is impossible to say where mountain ends and valley begins; as in the development of an animal,|as in a mountainous country, it is impossible to say where mountain ends and valley begins; as in the development of an animal, LJ026-0028|it is futile to argue about the exact period when, for instance, the egg becomes a tadpole or the tadpole a frog,|it is futile to argue about the exact period when, for instance, the egg becomes a tadpole or the tadpole a frog, LJ026-0029|so in the case under discussion.|so in the case under discussion. LJ026-0030|The distinction between the higher plants and animals is perfectly sharp and obvious,|The distinction between the higher plants and animals is perfectly sharp and obvious, LJ026-0031|but when the two groups are traced downward they are found gradually to merge,|but when the two groups are traced downward they are found gradually to merge, LJ026-0032|as it were, into an assemblage of organisms which partake of the characters of both kingdoms and cannot without a certain violence|as it were, into an assemblage of organisms which partake of the characters of both kingdoms and cannot without a certain violence LJ026-0033|be either included in or excluded from either.|be either included in or excluded from either. LJ026-0034|When any given "protist" has to be classified the case must be decided on its individual merits;|When any given "protist" has to be classified the case must be decided on its individual merits; LJ026-0035|the organism must be compared in detail with all those which resemble it closely in structure, physiology and life history,|the organism must be compared in detail with all those which resemble it closely in structure, physiology and life history, LJ026-0036|and then a balance must be struck and the doubtful form placed in the kingdom with which it has, on the whole, most points in common.|and then a balance must be struck and the doubtful form placed in the kingdom with which it has, on the whole, most points in common. LJ026-0037|It will no doubt occur to the reader that, on the theory of evolution,|It will no doubt occur to the reader that, on the theory of evolution, LJ026-0038|the fact of the animal and vegetable kingdoms being related to one another like two trees united at the roots may be accounted for by the hypothesis that|the fact of the animal and vegetable kingdoms being related to one another like two trees united at the roots may be accounted for by the hypothesis that LJ026-0039|the earliest organisms were protists and that from them animals and plants were evolved along divergent lines of descent.|the earliest organisms were protists and that from them animals and plants were evolved along divergent lines of descent. LJ026-0040|And in this connection the fact that some bacteria -- the simplest organisms known and devoid of chlorophyll|And in this connection the fact that some bacteria -- the simplest organisms known and devoid of chlorophyll LJ026-0041|may flourish in solutions wholly devoid of organic matter is very significant.|may flourish in solutions wholly devoid of organic matter is very significant. LJ026-0042|The lower plants and animals referred to above are so far from everyday observation|The lower plants and animals referred to above are so far from everyday observation LJ026-0043|and hence so unfamiliar that to most people the comparison made will mean little in terms of ordinary green flowering plants and common vertebrate animals.|and hence so unfamiliar that to most people the comparison made will mean little in terms of ordinary green flowering plants and common vertebrate animals. LJ026-0044|In order to emphasize the fundamental similarity of organic function in higher and lower animals and plants, let us compare any higher plant|In order to emphasize the fundamental similarity of organic function in higher and lower animals and plants, let us compare any higher plant LJ026-0045|e.g., a bean plant with a higher animal, e.g., frog or even man.|e.g., a bean plant with a higher animal, e.g., frog or even man. LJ026-0046|In each the life is the sum total of a series of definite processes -- nutrition or food supply,|In each the life is the sum total of a series of definite processes -- nutrition or food supply, LJ026-0047|circulation, metabolism, excretion, oxygenation (part of respiration),|circulation, metabolism, excretion, oxygenation (part of respiration), LJ026-0048|movement, irritability (nervous activity) and reproduction.|movement, irritability (nervous activity) and reproduction. LJ026-0049|In turn these will be compared for the animal and the plant,|In turn these will be compared for the animal and the plant, LJ026-0050|following in part the comparisons of certain animals and plants by Sedgwick and Wilson and others.|following in part the comparisons of certain animals and plants by Sedgwick and Wilson and others. LJ026-0051|These comparisons will, however, be translated into terms applicable to any species of higher plants or animals.|These comparisons will, however, be translated into terms applicable to any species of higher plants or animals. LJ026-0052|In the nutrition of the animal the most essential and characteristic part of the food supply is derived from vegetable|In the nutrition of the animal the most essential and characteristic part of the food supply is derived from vegetable LJ026-0053|or animal matter in the form of various organic compounds, of which the most important are proteids (protoplasm, albumen, etc.),|or animal matter in the form of various organic compounds, of which the most important are proteids (protoplasm, albumen, etc.), LJ026-0054|carbohydrates (starch, cellulose) and fats.|carbohydrates (starch, cellulose) and fats. LJ026-0055|These materials are used by the animal in the manufacture of new protoplasm to take the place of that which has been used up.|These materials are used by the animal in the manufacture of new protoplasm to take the place of that which has been used up. LJ026-0056|It is, however, impossible for the animal to build these materials directly into the substance of its own body.|It is, however, impossible for the animal to build these materials directly into the substance of its own body. LJ026-0057|They must first undergo certain preparatory chemical changes known collectively as digestion|They must first undergo certain preparatory chemical changes known collectively as digestion LJ026-0058|and only after the completion of this process can all the food be absorbed into the circulation.|and only after the completion of this process can all the food be absorbed into the circulation. LJ026-0059|For this purpose the food is taken not into the body proper, but into a kind of tubular chemical laboratory; called the alimentary canal,|For this purpose the food is taken not into the body proper, but into a kind of tubular chemical laboratory; called the alimentary canal, LJ026-0060|through which it slowly passes, being subjected meanwhile to the action of certain chemical substances or reagents, known as digestive ferments.|through which it slowly passes, being subjected meanwhile to the action of certain chemical substances or reagents, known as digestive ferments. LJ026-0061|These substances, which are dissolved in a watery liquid to form the digestive fluid, are secreted by the walls of the alimentary tube.|These substances, which are dissolved in a watery liquid to form the digestive fluid, are secreted by the walls of the alimentary tube. LJ026-0062|Through their action the solid portions are liquefied and the food is rendered capable of absorption into the body proper.|Through their action the solid portions are liquefied and the food is rendered capable of absorption into the body proper. LJ026-0063|The food supply of the higher plant, like that of the animal, is the source of the required matter and energy,|The food supply of the higher plant, like that of the animal, is the source of the required matter and energy, LJ026-0064|but unlike that of the animal, it is not chiefly an income of foods, but only of the raw materials of food.|but unlike that of the animal, it is not chiefly an income of foods, but only of the raw materials of food. LJ026-0065|Matter enters the plant in the liquid or gaseous form by diffusion,|Matter enters the plant in the liquid or gaseous form by diffusion, LJ026-0066|both from the soil through the roots (liquids) and from the atmosphere through the leaves (gases).|both from the soil through the roots (liquids) and from the atmosphere through the leaves (gases). LJ026-0067|We have here the direct absorption into the body proper of food-stuffs precisely as the animal takes in water and oxygen.|We have here the direct absorption into the body proper of food-stuffs precisely as the animal takes in water and oxygen. LJ026-0068|Energy enters the plant, to a small extent,|Energy enters the plant, to a small extent, LJ026-0069|as the potential energy of foodstuffs, but comes in principally as the kinetic energy of sunlight absorbed in the leaves.|as the potential energy of foodstuffs, but comes in principally as the kinetic energy of sunlight absorbed in the leaves. LJ026-0070|Of the substances the solids (salts, etc.) must be dissolved in water before they can be taken in.|Of the substances the solids (salts, etc.) must be dissolved in water before they can be taken in. LJ026-0071|Water and dissolved salts continually pass by diffusion from the soil into the roots, where together they constitute the sap.|Water and dissolved salts continually pass by diffusion from the soil into the roots, where together they constitute the sap. LJ026-0072|The sap travels throughout the whole plant, the main though not the only cause of movement|The sap travels throughout the whole plant, the main though not the only cause of movement LJ026-0073|being the constant transpiration (evaporation) of watery vapor from the leaves, especially through the stomata.|being the constant transpiration (evaporation) of watery vapor from the leaves, especially through the stomata. LJ026-0074|The gaseous matters (carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen) enter the plant mainly by diffusion from the atmosphere,|The gaseous matters (carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen) enter the plant mainly by diffusion from the atmosphere, LJ026-0075|are dissolved by the sap in the leaves and elsewhere and thus may pass to every portion of the plant.|are dissolved by the sap in the leaves and elsewhere and thus may pass to every portion of the plant. LJ026-0076|The green plant owes its power of absorbing the energy of sunlight|The green plant owes its power of absorbing the energy of sunlight LJ026-0077|to the chlorophyll bodies or chromatophores, for plants which, like fungi, etc., are devoid of chlorophyll, are unable thus to acquire energy.|to the chlorophyll bodies or chromatophores, for plants which, like fungi, etc., are devoid of chlorophyll, are unable thus to acquire energy. LJ026-0078|Entering the chlorophyll bodies, the kinetic energy of sunlight is applied to the decomposition of carbon dioxide and water.|Entering the chlorophyll bodies, the kinetic energy of sunlight is applied to the decomposition of carbon dioxide and water. LJ026-0079|After passing through manifold but imperfectly known processes, the elements of these substances finally reappear as starch,|After passing through manifold but imperfectly known processes, the elements of these substances finally reappear as starch, LJ026-0080|often in the form of granules embedded in the chlorophyll bodies and free oxygen, most of which is returned to the atmosphere.|often in the form of granules embedded in the chlorophyll bodies and free oxygen, most of which is returned to the atmosphere. LJ026-0081|Thus the leaf of a green plant in the light is continually absorbing carbon dioxide and giving forth free oxygen.|Thus the leaf of a green plant in the light is continually absorbing carbon dioxide and giving forth free oxygen. LJ026-0082|Carbon dioxide and water contain no potential energy, since the affinities of their constituent elements are completely satisfied.|Carbon dioxide and water contain no potential energy, since the affinities of their constituent elements are completely satisfied. LJ026-0083|Starch, however, contains potential energy, since the molecule is relatively unstable|Starch, however, contains potential energy, since the molecule is relatively unstable LJ026-0084|i.e., capable of decomposition into simpler, stabler molecules in which stronger affinities are satisfied.|i.e., capable of decomposition into simpler, stabler molecules in which stronger affinities are satisfied. LJ026-0085|And this is due to the fact that in the manufacture of starch in the chlorophyll bodies|And this is due to the fact that in the manufacture of starch in the chlorophyll bodies LJ026-0086|the kinetic energy of sunlight was expended in lifting the atoms into position of vantage, thus endowing them with energy of position.|the kinetic energy of sunlight was expended in lifting the atoms into position of vantage, thus endowing them with energy of position. LJ026-0087|In this way some of the radiant and kinetic energy of the sun comes to be stored up as potential energy in the starch.|In this way some of the radiant and kinetic energy of the sun comes to be stored up as potential energy in the starch. LJ026-0088|In short, the green plant is able by cooperation with sunlight to use simple raw materials (carbon dioxide, water, oxygen, etc.)|In short, the green plant is able by cooperation with sunlight to use simple raw materials (carbon dioxide, water, oxygen, etc.) LJ026-0089|poor in energy or devoid of it, and out of them to manufacture food -- i.e. complex compounds rich in available potential energy.|poor in energy or devoid of it, and out of them to manufacture food -- i.e. complex compounds rich in available potential energy. LJ026-0090|This power is possessed by green plants alone; all other organisms being dependent for energy upon the potential energy of ready-made food.|This power is possessed by green plants alone; all other organisms being dependent for energy upon the potential energy of ready-made food. LJ026-0091|This must, in the first instance, be provided for them by green plants, and hence without chlorophyll-bearing plants,|This must, in the first instance, be provided for them by green plants, and hence without chlorophyll-bearing plants, LJ026-0092|animals (and colorless plants as well) apparently could not long exist.|animals (and colorless plants as well) apparently could not long exist. LJ026-0093|The plant absorbs also a small amount of kinetic energy, independently of the sunlight, in the form of heat.|The plant absorbs also a small amount of kinetic energy, independently of the sunlight, in the form of heat. LJ026-0094|This, however, is probably not a source of vital energy, but only contributes to the maintenance of the body temperature.|This, however, is probably not a source of vital energy, but only contributes to the maintenance of the body temperature. LJ026-0095|Food (starch) thus produced in the green leaves of higher plants and the inorganic foods|Food (starch) thus produced in the green leaves of higher plants and the inorganic foods LJ026-0096|water, nitrites or nitrates and various mineral substances in solution in water|water, nitrites or nitrates and various mineral substances in solution in water LJ026-0097|furnish the materials and energy required for the life and growth of the plant.|furnish the materials and energy required for the life and growth of the plant. LJ026-0098|The circulatory system distributes these foods. In animals foods prepared for absorption in the stomach and intestine (by digestion)|The circulatory system distributes these foods. In animals foods prepared for absorption in the stomach and intestine (by digestion) LJ026-0099|are absorbed by the circulating liquids (blood and lymph) and transported to all cells of the animal body.|are absorbed by the circulating liquids (blood and lymph) and transported to all cells of the animal body. LJ026-0100|In the plant the inorganic matter in water from the soil are absorbed by the roots and carried up definite tubes in the woody part of the stem.|In the plant the inorganic matter in water from the soil are absorbed by the roots and carried up definite tubes in the woody part of the stem. LJ026-0101|The causes of this ascent are not clear,|The causes of this ascent are not clear, LJ026-0102|but root pressure due to osmosis, capillary action and evaporation from the leaves are factors.|but root pressure due to osmosis, capillary action and evaporation from the leaves are factors. LJ026-0103|Just as the solid food of animals must be digested in preparation for absorption,|Just as the solid food of animals must be digested in preparation for absorption, LJ026-0104|so starch manufactured in the leaves must be digested (dissolved) before it can be transported.|so starch manufactured in the leaves must be digested (dissolved) before it can be transported. LJ026-0105|This is done by diastase, an enzyme of plant cells.|This is done by diastase, an enzyme of plant cells. LJ026-0106|The change is from starch to a sugar capable of diffusion.|The change is from starch to a sugar capable of diffusion. LJ026-0107|Dissolved in water, the sugar is transported down delicate tubes, chiefly in the growing bark region of the stem.|Dissolved in water, the sugar is transported down delicate tubes, chiefly in the growing bark region of the stem. LJ026-0108|It is clear that there are upward and downward currents of water containing food (comparable to blood of an animal),|It is clear that there are upward and downward currents of water containing food (comparable to blood of an animal), LJ026-0109|but no system of complete circulation as in the blood vessels of a higher animal.|but no system of complete circulation as in the blood vessels of a higher animal. LJ026-0110|However, the result in distributed food is the same in the plant and in the animal.|However, the result in distributed food is the same in the plant and in the animal. LJ026-0111|In the cells the foods undergo metabolic changes.|In the cells the foods undergo metabolic changes. LJ026-0112|In an animal the foods in the circulating liquids, blood and lymph, are selected and absorbed by the cells.|In an animal the foods in the circulating liquids, blood and lymph, are selected and absorbed by the cells. LJ026-0113|Only proteid foods form new protoplasm|Only proteid foods form new protoplasm LJ026-0114|and even of proteids only a limited amount, 75 to one hundred grams a day for a man, is built into new protoplasm.|and even of proteids only a limited amount, seventy-five to one hundred grams a day for a man, is built into new protoplasm. LJ026-0115|The excess undergoes oxidation and forms nitrogen excretions.|The excess undergoes oxidation and forms nitrogen excretions. LJ026-0116|The foods containing only the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen (fats and carbohydrates)|The foods containing only the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen (fats and carbohydrates) LJ026-0117|are directly oxidized to excretions and, lacking nitrogen, cannot serve for making new animal protoplasm.|are directly oxidized to excretions and, lacking nitrogen, cannot serve for making new animal protoplasm. LJ026-0118|Fat and carbohydrate foods, then, never become living matter.|Fat and carbohydrate foods, then, never become living matter. LJ026-0119|They may be stored, especially as fat, until needed for oxidation to supply energy.|They may be stored, especially as fat, until needed for oxidation to supply energy. LJ026-0120|The building up of the protoplasm from proteids is anabolism, constructive metabolism.|The building up of the protoplasm from proteids is anabolism, constructive metabolism. LJ026-0121|The destruction of protoplasm, excess proteids or the fat and carbohydrate foods is catabolism, destructive metabolism.|The destruction of protoplasm, excess proteids or the fat and carbohydrate foods is catabolism, destructive metabolism. LJ026-0122|Catabolism is probably due to enzyme action, but the final result is chiefly carbon dioxide and water,|Catabolism is probably due to enzyme action, but the final result is chiefly carbon dioxide and water, LJ026-0123|which could be derived by the ordinary chemical evolution of protoplasm, proteid, sugar, starch or fats.|which could be derived by the ordinary chemical evolution of protoplasm, proteid, sugar, starch or fats. LJ026-0124|In the plant, starch, as has been seen, is first formed in the chlorophyll-bodies.|In the plant, starch, as has been seen, is first formed in the chlorophyll-bodies. LJ026-0125|But the formation of starch, all important as it is, is after all only the manufacture of food|But the formation of starch, all important as it is, is after all only the manufacture of food LJ026-0126|as a preliminary to the real processes of nutrition.|as a preliminary to the real processes of nutrition. LJ026-0127|These processes must take place everywhere in ordinary protoplasm,|These processes must take place everywhere in ordinary protoplasm, LJ026-0128|for it is here that oxidation occurs and the need for a renewal of matter and energy consequently arises.|for it is here that oxidation occurs and the need for a renewal of matter and energy consequently arises. LJ026-0129|Sooner or later the starch grains are changed into a kind of sugar (glucose), which, unlike starch, dissolves in the sap|Sooner or later the starch grains are changed into a kind of sugar (glucose), which, unlike starch, dissolves in the sap LJ026-0130|and may thus be easily transported to all parts of the plant.|and may thus be easily transported to all parts of the plant. LJ026-0131|Wherever there is need for new protoplasm, whether to repair previous waste or to supply materials for growth,|Wherever there is need for new protoplasm, whether to repair previous waste or to supply materials for growth, LJ026-0132|after absorption into the cells the elements of the starch (or glucose) are, by the living protoplasm, in some unknown way|after absorption into the cells the elements of the starch (or glucose) are, by the living protoplasm, in some unknown way LJ026-0133|combined with nitrogen and sulphur (probably also with salts, water, etc.) to form proteid matter.|combined with nitrogen and sulphur (probably also with salts, water, etc.) to form proteid matter. LJ026-0134|The particles of this newly formed compound are incorporated into the protoplasm.|The particles of this newly formed compound are incorporated into the protoplasm. LJ026-0135|If a larger quantity of starch is formed in the chlorophyll bodies than is immediately needed by the protoplasm for purposes of repair or growth,|If a larger quantity of starch is formed in the chlorophyll bodies than is immediately needed by the protoplasm for purposes of repair or growth, LJ026-0136|it may be reconverted into starch after journeying as glucose through the plant|it may be reconverted into starch after journeying as glucose through the plant LJ026-0137|and be laid down as "reserve starch" in the cells of root or stem or elsewhere.|and be laid down as "reserve starch" in the cells of root or stem or elsewhere. LJ026-0138|Apparently when this reserve supply is finally needed at any point in the plant, it is again changed to glucose and transported thither.|Apparently when this reserve supply is finally needed at any point in the plant, it is again changed to glucose and transported thither. LJ026-0139|It is probable that new leaves and new tissues generally are always formed in part from this reserve starch.|It is probable that new leaves and new tissues generally are always formed in part from this reserve starch. LJ026-0140|In the plant as in the animal metabolism must consist of anabolic and catabolic processes.|In the plant as in the animal metabolism must consist of anabolic and catabolic processes. LJ026-0141|The construction in the cells of new proteid from the absorbed carbohydrate and the materials from the soil is true anabolism.|The construction in the cells of new proteid from the absorbed carbohydrate and the materials from the soil is true anabolism. LJ026-0142|It is also clear that catabolism or oxidation for the liberation of energy occurs as in animals, but this process is slower.|It is also clear that catabolism or oxidation for the liberation of energy occurs as in animals, but this process is slower. LJ026-0143|Probably foods containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are the sources of energy in the higher plants as in animals.|Probably foods containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are the sources of energy in the higher plants as in animals. LJ026-0144|In both plants and animals simple waste substances result from the catabolic processes in the cells.|In both plants and animals simple waste substances result from the catabolic processes in the cells. LJ026-0145|In the animal carbon dioxide, water and nitrogen compounds are the chief excretions.|In the animal carbon dioxide, water and nitrogen compounds are the chief excretions. LJ026-0146|They are absorbed by the circulating liquids and carried to the eliminating organs, lungs and kidneys chiefly, for elimination.|They are absorbed by the circulating liquids and carried to the eliminating organs, lungs and kidneys chiefly, for elimination. LJ026-0147|In the higher plants the excretions are carbon dioxide, which escapes through the epidermis of root, stem and leaf and through the stomata;|In the higher plants the excretions are carbon dioxide, which escapes through the epidermis of root, stem and leaf and through the stomata; LJ026-0148|water which is lost by evaporation, especially from the leaf surface through the stomata;|water which is lost by evaporation, especially from the leaf surface through the stomata; LJ026-0149|excretions which are lost by osmosis through the roots and the accumulated but useless mineral substances which are eliminated by leaf fall.|excretions which are lost by osmosis through the roots and the accumulated but useless mineral substances which are eliminated by leaf fall. LJ026-0150|In both animals and plants oxygen is essential to the catabolic part of metabolism.|In both animals and plants oxygen is essential to the catabolic part of metabolism. LJ026-0151|Hence oxygen must be supplied to the cells.|Hence oxygen must be supplied to the cells. LJ026-0152|Oxygenation is the term used to denote the oxygen-supplying part of respiration;|Oxygenation is the term used to denote the oxygen-supplying part of respiration; LJ026-0153|the other part of respiration, elimination of carbon dioxide, has been treated under excretions.|the other part of respiration, elimination of carbon dioxide, has been treated under excretions. LJ026-0154|In the animal oxygen is absorbed by the blood, in excess by the hemoglobin of the red cells of the blood|In the animal oxygen is absorbed by the blood, in excess by the hemoglobin of the red cells of the blood LJ026-0155|and later is absorbed from the blood and lymph by all the living cells.|and later is absorbed from the blood and lymph by all the living cells. LJ026-0156|In the plant also oxygen is absorbed through the epidermis and stomata from the air.|In the plant also oxygen is absorbed through the epidermis and stomata from the air. LJ026-0157|This process is, however, obscured during the day because of the oxygen freed in the manufacture of starch which goes on at that time.|This process is, however, obscured during the day because of the oxygen freed in the manufacture of starch which goes on at that time. LJ026-0158|Probably this freed oxygen is used for the purpose of oxygenation, but more is freed in the photosynthetic process than is needed for oxygenation|Probably this freed oxygen is used for the purpose of oxygenation, but more is freed in the photosynthetic process than is needed for oxygenation LJ026-0159|and hence the excess oxygen is eliminated while starch manufacture is in process.|and hence the excess oxygen is eliminated while starch manufacture is in process. LJ026-0160|In comparing a higher animal and a green plant confusion must be avoided regarding the part played by oxygen and carbon dioxide in true respiration|In comparing a higher animal and a green plant confusion must be avoided regarding the part played by oxygen and carbon dioxide in true respiration LJ026-0161|with the part played by the same substances in starch formation (photosynthesis).|with the part played by the same substances in starch formation (photosynthesis). LJ026-0162|In non-green plants like the Indian pipe and mushrooms the breathing of oxygen and the excretion of carbon dioxide are as in the animal.|In non-green plants like the Indian pipe and mushrooms the breathing of oxygen and the excretion of carbon dioxide are as in the animal. LJ026-0163|This is true also of green plants in darkness and even in the light of all parts of green plants except the chlorophyll-bodies.|This is true also of green plants in darkness and even in the light of all parts of green plants except the chlorophyll-bodies. LJ026-0164|These constitute a sort of extra mechanism, enabling green plants to make their own carbohydrate food.|These constitute a sort of extra mechanism, enabling green plants to make their own carbohydrate food. LJ026-0165|Imagine a higher animal with an attachment for turning the carbon dioxide and water excreted|Imagine a higher animal with an attachment for turning the carbon dioxide and water excreted LJ026-0166|back to starch usable as food and the comparison of the green plant and the animal would be complete.|back to starch usable as food and the comparison of the green plant and the animal would be complete. LJ027-0001|The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler.|The Science: History of the Universe, Volume five. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. LJ027-0002|Biology. Chapter 10. Morphology and Embryology, Part One.|Biology. Chapter ten. Morphology and Embryology, Part One. LJ027-0003|The facts of biology which admit of adequate explanation only in connection with the theory of descent|The facts of biology which admit of adequate explanation only in connection with the theory of descent LJ027-0004|are grouped by Romanes and other writers on organic evolution under the heads of morphology, embryology, classification,|are grouped by Romanes and other writers on organic evolution under the heads of morphology, embryology, classification, LJ027-0005|paleontology, distribution and domestication.|paleontology, distribution and domestication. LJ027-0006|In all these lines the facts are drawn together by a strong thread of unity.|In all these lines the facts are drawn together by a strong thread of unity. LJ027-0007|There are numberless similarities and correlations and surprising uniformities.|There are numberless similarities and correlations and surprising uniformities. LJ027-0008|The great variety of life as exhibited in the countless species of plants and animals has been referred to, and yet, great as this variety is,|The great variety of life as exhibited in the countless species of plants and animals has been referred to, and yet, great as this variety is, LJ027-0009|there are, after all, only a few types of structure among all animals and plants, some three or four or eight or ten general modes of development,|there are, after all, only a few types of structure among all animals and plants, some three or four or eight or ten general modes of development, LJ027-0010|and all the rest are modifications from these few types.|and all the rest are modifications from these few types. LJ027-0011|It is, moreover, true that all living forms are but series of modifications and extensions of one single plan of structure.|It is, moreover, true that all living forms are but series of modifications and extensions of one single plan of structure. LJ027-0012|All have the same ultimate substance|All have the same ultimate substance LJ027-0013|the mysterious semi-fluid network of protoplasm, which is, so far as is known, the physical basis of all life;|the mysterious semi-fluid network of protoplasm, which is, so far as is known, the physical basis of all life; LJ027-0014|and the equally mysterious nuclear substance or chromatin|and the equally mysterious nuclear substance or chromatin LJ027-0015|which in some fashion presides over all the movements of the protoplasm and is the physical basis of the phenomena of heredity.|which in some fashion presides over all the movements of the protoplasm and is the physical basis of the phenomena of heredity. LJ027-0016|The same laws of heredity, variability and of response to outside stimulus hold in all parts of the organic world.|The same laws of heredity, variability and of response to outside stimulus hold in all parts of the organic world. LJ027-0017|All organisms have the same need of reproduction.|All organisms have the same need of reproduction. LJ027-0018|All are forced to make concession after concession to their surroundings, and in these concessions all progress in life consists.|All are forced to make concession after concession to their surroundings, and in these concessions all progress in life consists. LJ027-0019|And at last each organism or each alliance of organisms must come to the greatest concession of all, which is called death.|And at last each organism or each alliance of organisms must come to the greatest concession of all, which is called death. LJ027-0020|The unity in life, then, is not less a fact than is life's great diversity.|The unity in life, then, is not less a fact than is life's great diversity. LJ027-0021|Whatever emphasis is laid upon the diversity of life, the essential unity of all organisms must not be forgotten.|Whatever emphasis is laid upon the diversity of life, the essential unity of all organisms must not be forgotten. LJ027-0022|An examination of the facts in each of the lines of evidence makes it clear|An examination of the facts in each of the lines of evidence makes it clear LJ027-0023|that the only reasonable explanation for the existence of a fundamental unity in organic life|that the only reasonable explanation for the existence of a fundamental unity in organic life LJ027-0024|is the theory of descent -- i.e., that similarities are due to blood relationship and that differences come from adaptive modifications.|is the theory of descent -- i.e., that similarities are due to blood relationship and that differences come from adaptive modifications. LJ027-0025|The facts adduced from morphology, being the result of researches into the structure of adult animals and plants,|The facts adduced from morphology, being the result of researches into the structure of adult animals and plants, LJ027-0026|lead to a preview of certain principles of adaptation, necessary for their interpretation.|lead to a preview of certain principles of adaptation, necessary for their interpretation. LJ027-0027|First, it must be noted that some structures are not non-adaptive, that is, do not change to fit changed habits or conditions of life.|First, it must be noted that some structures are not non-adaptive, that is, do not change to fit changed habits or conditions of life. LJ027-0028|Such structures or organs are most often found internally.|Such structures or organs are most often found internally. LJ027-0029|For illustration: a change in the locomotive habit of a bird from that of flying to that of an ostrich|For illustration: a change in the locomotive habit of a bird from that of flying to that of an ostrich LJ027-0030|is associated with an adaptive modification of locomotor structures, legs and wings,|is associated with an adaptive modification of locomotor structures, legs and wings, LJ027-0031|but not in any striking way is there change in the internal organs.|but not in any striking way is there change in the internal organs. LJ027-0032|Internal organs may persist unchanged and hence they offer good guides to classification.|Internal organs may persist unchanged and hence they offer good guides to classification. LJ027-0033|On the other hand, external structures are likely to undergo adaptati
In the second place, it must be noted that adaptations to similar conditions may result in superficial resemblances.
For example, there is a superficial resemblance between the wing of an insect and the wing of a bird
both adaptations to an aerial environment;
between the heart of an insect and the heart of a vertebrate animal
both adaptations for pumping blood;
between the fin of a fish and the paddle of a whale
both adaptive swimming organs, yet the resemblance in these cases does not go deeper than the surface -- it is one of function only.
All such cases of resemblance in function but not in detailed plan of structure are called "analogies,"
and mean nothing more than similarity of environment.
Turning to more fundamental resemblances, such as the wing of a bat and the wing of a bird,
careful study shows detailed internal as well as external similarities of structure. Such cases are "homologies".
On the one hand, then, are found structures which are perfectly analogous and yet in no way homologous:
totally different structures are modified to perform the same functions.
On the other hand are found structures which are perfectly homologous and yet in no way analogous:
the structural elements remain, but are profoundly modified to perform totally different functions.
Homology thus means identity of structure which is the result of identity of parentage. It is the stamp of heredity.
It means blood relationship.
These principles of homology are essential to a correct interpretation of the facts of morphology.
The most striking fact of similar structure among plants and among animals is the existence of a common general plan in any group.
Since backboned animals are best known to most readers, they may be taken as an illustration.
All vertebrate animals, and none other," says Le Conte, "have an internal jointed skeleton worked by muscles on the outside.|"All vertebrate animals, and none other," says Le Conte, "have an internal jointed skeleton worked by muscles on the outside. LJ027-0056|The relation of skeleton and muscle in arthropods is exactly the reverse.|The relation of skeleton and muscle in arthropods is exactly the reverse. LJ027-0057|In all vertebrates, and in none other, the axis of this skeleton is a jointed backbone (vertebral column)|In all vertebrates, and in none other, the axis of this skeleton is a jointed backbone (vertebral column) LJ027-0058|enclosing and protecting the nervous centers (cerebrospinal axis).|enclosing and protecting the nervous centers (cerebrospinal axis). LJ027-0059|These, therefore, may well be called backboned animals.|These, therefore, may well be called backboned animals. LJ027-0060|All vertebrates, and none other, have a number of their anterior vertebral joints enlarged and consolidated into a box to form the skull,|All vertebrates, and none other, have a number of their anterior vertebral joints enlarged and consolidated into a box to form the skull, LJ027-0061|in order to enclose and protect a similar enlargement of the nervous center,|in order to enclose and protect a similar enlargement of the nervous center, LJ027-0062|viz., the brain; and also usually, but not always, a number of posterior joints,|viz., the brain; and also usually, but not always, a number of posterior joints, LJ027-0063|enlarged and consolidated to form the pelvis, to serve as a firm support to the hind-limbs.|enlarged and consolidated to form the pelvis, to serve as a firm support to the hind-limbs. LJ027-0064|All vertebrates, and none other, have two cavities,|All vertebrates, and none other, have two cavities, LJ027-0065|enclosed and protected by the skeleton, viz., the neural cavity above, and the visceral or body cavity below, the vertebral column.|enclosed and protected by the skeleton, viz., the neural cavity above, and the visceral or body cavity below, the vertebral column. LJ027-0066|All vertebrates, with few exceptions, and no other animals, have two and only two pair of limbs.|All vertebrates, with few exceptions, and no other animals, have two and only two pair of limbs. LJ027-0067|The exceptions are of two kinds, viz.: (a) some lowest fishes, amphioxus and lampreys,|The exceptions are of two kinds, viz.: (a) some lowest fishes, amphioxus and lampreys, LJ027-0068|which probably represent the vertebrate condition before limbs were acquired;|which probably represent the vertebrate condition before limbs were acquired; LJ027-0069|and (b) degenerate forms like snakes and some lizards, which have lost their limbs by disuse.|and (b) degenerate forms like snakes and some lizards, which have lost their limbs by disuse. LJ027-0070|So much concerns the general plan of skeletal structures and is strongly suggestive of -- in fact it is inexplicable without -- common origin.|So much concerns the general plan of skeletal structures and is strongly suggestive of -- in fact it is inexplicable without -- common origin. LJ027-0071|But much more remains which is not only suggestive, but demonstrative of such origin.|But much more remains which is not only suggestive, but demonstrative of such origin. LJ027-0072|By extensive comparison in the taxonomic and ontogenic series, the whole vertebrate structure in all its details in different animals|By extensive comparison in the taxonomic and ontogenic series, the whole vertebrate structure in all its details in different animals LJ027-0073|may be shown to be modifications one of another.|may be shown to be modifications one of another. LJ027-0074|Sometimes a piece is enlarged, sometimes diminished, or even becomes obsolete; sometimes several pieces are consolidated into one;|Sometimes a piece is enlarged, sometimes diminished, or even becomes obsolete; sometimes several pieces are consolidated into one; LJ027-0075|but, in spite of all these obscurations, corresponding parts usually may be made out.|but, in spite of all these obscurations, corresponding parts usually may be made out. LJ027-0076|These remarkable similarities in the common general plan alone are convincing evidences of descent,|These remarkable similarities in the common general plan alone are convincing evidences of descent, LJ027-0077|but attention may be called to a like similarity extending to the details of structure.|but attention may be called to a like similarity extending to the details of structure. LJ027-0078|For example: the wings of a bat (a mammal), a bird and a fossil flying reptile all show the same bones adaptively modified;|For example: the wings of a bat (a mammal), a bird and a fossil flying reptile all show the same bones adaptively modified; LJ027-0079|a series of either fore or hind limbs of a mammal with one toe (horse),|a series of either fore or hind limbs of a mammal with one toe (horse), LJ027-0080|two toes (sheep), four toes (hog) and five toes (dog)|two toes (sheep), four toes (hog) and five toes (dog) LJ027-0081|exhibit a remarkable series of homologies pointing to a five-toed ancestor,|exhibit a remarkable series of homologies pointing to a five-toed ancestor, LJ027-0082|and any other series of organs of vertebrates would give the same evidence of fundamental resemblances (homologies).|and any other series of organs of vertebrates would give the same evidence of fundamental resemblances (homologies). LJ027-0083|For such a series of facts the reader must be referred to special books like Wiedersheim's "Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrates,
Romanes's "Darwin and After Darwin", and Le Conte's "Evolution."
The existence of great similarities in vertebrate structure is not always fully recognized.
To the superficial observer the bodies of animals of different classes seem to differ fundamentally in plan,
to be entirely different machines, made each for its own purposes, at once, out of hand.
Extensive comparison, on the contrary, shows them to be the same, although the essential identity is obscured by adaptive modifications.
The simplest, in fact the only scientific, explanation of the phenomena of vertebrate structure is the idea of a primal vertebrate,
modified more and more through successive generations by the necessities of different modes of life.
See, then, the difference between man's mode of working and Nature's.
A man having made a steam-engine, and desiring to use it for a different purpose from that for which it was first designed and used,
will nearly always be compelled to add new parts not contemplated in the original machine.
Nature rarely makes new parts -- never, if she can avoid it -- but, on the contrary, adapts an old part to the new function.
It is as if Nature were not free to use any and every device to accomplish her end, but were conditioned by her own plans of structure;
as, indeed, she must be according to the derivation theory.
Thus, in the fin of a fish, the fore-paw of a reptile or a mammal, the wing of a bird, and the arm and hand of a man
is found the same part, variously modified for many purposes.
Another striking class of the facts of morphology which admit of scientific explanation only along the line of homology
are the thousands of cases of rudimentary or vestigial structures to be found.
Throughout both the animal and vegetable kingdoms dwarfed and useless representatives of organs are constantly met with,
which in other and allied kinds of animals and plants are of large size and functional utility.
Thus, for instance, the unborn whale has rudimentary teeth,
which are never destined to cut the gums; and throughout its life this animal retains, in a similarly rudimentary condition,
a number of organs which never could have been of use to any kind of creature save a terrestrial quadruped.
Other well-known examples among vertebrates are: Vestiges of hind limbs in certain snakes, reduced wings in the Apteryx and ostriches,
rudiments of eyes in cave fishes, hind limbs beneath the skin of whales, the vermiform appendix in man,
as well as useless muscles to move the ears and the skin, and also a very much reduced hairy covering over the surface of the body.
Wiedersheim has recorded more than one hundred and eighty such structural reminiscences in man.
Now, rudimentary organs of this kind are of such frequent occurrence, that almost every species of organism presents one or more of them
usually, indeed, a considerable number.
How, then, are they to be accounted for?
Of course the theory of descent with adaptive modification has a simple answer to supply
Namely that when from changed conditions of life, an organ which was previously useful becomes useless,
it will be suffered to dwindle away in successive generations, under the influence of certain natural causes.
On the other hand, the theory of special creation can only maintain that these rudiments are formed for the sake of adhering to an ideal type.
Now, here again the former theory appears to be triumphant over the latter," says Romanes,|"Now, here again the former theory appears to be triumphant over the latter," says Romanes, LJ027-0118|"for, without waiting to dispute the wisdom of making dwarfed and useless structures merely for the whimsical motive assigned,|"for, without waiting to dispute the wisdom of making dwarfed and useless structures merely for the whimsical motive assigned, LJ027-0119|surely if such a method were adopted in so many cases, we should expect that in consistency it would be adopted in all cases.|surely if such a method were adopted in so many cases, we should expect that in consistency it would be adopted in all cases. LJ027-0120|This reasonable expectation, however, is far from being realized.|This reasonable expectation, however, is far from being realized. LJ027-0121|In numberless cases, such as that of the fore-limbs of serpents, no vestige of a rudiment is present.|In numberless cases, such as that of the fore-limbs of serpents, no vestige of a rudiment is present. LJ027-0122|But the vacillating policy in the matter of rudiments does not end here; for it is shown in a still more aggravated form|But the vacillating policy in the matter of rudiments does not end here; for it is shown in a still more aggravated form LJ027-0123|where within the limits of the same natural group of organisms a rudiment is sometimes present and sometimes absent.|where within the limits of the same natural group of organisms a rudiment is sometimes present and sometimes absent. LJ027-0124|For instance, although in nearly all the numerous species of snakes there are no vestiges of limbs,|For instance, although in nearly all the numerous species of snakes there are no vestiges of limbs, LJ027-0125|in the Python we find very tiny rudiments of the hindlimbs. Now,|in the Python we find very tiny rudiments of the hindlimbs. Now, LJ027-0126|is it a worthy conception of Deity that,|is it a worthy conception of Deity that, LJ027-0127|while neglecting to maintain his unity of ideal in the case of nearly all the numerous species of snakes, he should have added a tiny rudiment in the case of the Python|while neglecting to maintain his unity of ideal in the case of nearly all the numerous species of snakes, he should have added a tiny rudiment in the case of the Python LJ027-0128|and even in that case should have maintained his ideal very inefficiently, inasmuch as only two limbs, instead of four, are represented?|and even in that case should have maintained his ideal very inefficiently, inasmuch as only two limbs, instead of four, are represented? LJ027-0129|Convincing as are the evidences of descent recorded in the structure of plants and animals,|Convincing as are the evidences of descent recorded in the structure of plants and animals, LJ027-0130|these evidences have been in the past thirty years somewhat overshadowed by the far more surprising evidences|these evidences have been in the past thirty years somewhat overshadowed by the far more surprising evidences LJ027-0131|of descent discovered in the development of plant and animal embryos.|of descent discovered in the development of plant and animal embryos. LJ027-0132|A dozen volumes would be necessary|A dozen volumes would be necessary LJ027-0133|to present the mass of embryological evidence, but a few salient facts will illustrate the kind of evidence to be deduced from embryology.|to present the mass of embryological evidence, but a few salient facts will illustrate the kind of evidence to be deduced from embryology. LJ027-0134|Most remarkable of all the principles which have been discovered by embryologists is the "Recapitulation Doctrine
which, briefly stated, is that individual development (ontogeny) recapitulates ancestral history (phylogeny).
Illustrations quoted from the works of Romanes and Le Conte will make this principle clear.
It is an observable fact," says Romanes,|"It is an observable fact," says Romanes, LJ027-0138|that there is often a close correspondence between developmental changes as revealed by any chronological series of fossils which may happen to have been preserved,|that there is often a close correspondence between developmental changes as revealed by any chronological series of fossils which may happen to have been preserved, LJ027-0139|and developmental changes which may be observed during the life history of now existing individuals belonging to the same group of animals.|and developmental changes which may be observed during the life history of now existing individuals belonging to the same group of animals. LJ027-0141|is closely reproduced in the life-history of existing deer. Or, in other words,|is closely reproduced in the life-history of existing deer. Or, in other words, LJ027-0142|the antlers of an existing deer furnish in their development a kind of "resume," or recapitulation, of the successive phases|the antlers of an existing deer furnish in their development a kind of "resume," or recapitulation, of the successive phases LJ027-0143|whereby the primitive horn was gradually superseded by horns presenting a greater and greater number of prongs in successive species of extinct deer.|whereby the primitive horn was gradually superseded by horns presenting a greater and greater number of prongs in successive species of extinct deer. LJ027-0144|Now, it must be obvious|Now, it must be obvious LJ027-0145|that such a recapitulation in the life history of an existing animal of developmental changes successively distinctive of sundry allied,|that such a recapitulation in the life history of an existing animal of developmental changes successively distinctive of sundry allied, LJ027-0146|though now extinct species, speaks strongly in favor of evolution.|though now extinct species, speaks strongly in favor of evolution. LJ027-0147|For as it is of the essence of this theory that new forms arise from older forms by way of hereditary descent,|For as it is of the essence of this theory that new forms arise from older forms by way of hereditary descent, LJ027-0148|we should antecedently expect, if the theory is true,|we should antecedently expect, if the theory is true, LJ027-0149|that the phases of development presented by the individual organism would follow, in their main outlines, those phases of development|that the phases of development presented by the individual organism would follow, in their main outlines, those phases of development LJ027-0150|through which their long line of ancestors had passed.|through which their long line of ancestors had passed. LJ027-0151|The only alternative view is that as species of deer,|The only alternative view is that as species of deer, LJ027-0152|for instance, were separately created, additional prongs were successively added to their antlers; and yet that,|for instance, were separately created, additional prongs were successively added to their antlers; and yet that, LJ027-0153|in order to be so added to successive species, every individual deer belonging to later species was required to repeat in his own lifetime|in order to be so added to successive species, every individual deer belonging to later species was required to repeat in his own lifetime LJ027-0154|the process of successive additions which had previously taken place in a remote series of extinct species.|the process of successive additions which had previously taken place in a remote series of extinct species. LJ027-0155|Now I do not deny that this view is a possible view; but I do deny that it is a probable one.|Now I do not deny that this view is a possible view; but I do deny that it is a probable one. LJ027-0156|According to the evolutionary interpretation of such facts, we can see a very good reason why the life-history of the individual|According to the evolutionary interpretation of such facts, we can see a very good reason why the life-history of the individual LJ027-0157|is thus a condensed resume of the life history of its ancestral species.|is thus a condensed resume of the life history of its ancestral species. LJ027-0158|But according to the opposite view no reason can be assigned why such should be the case.|But according to the opposite view no reason can be assigned why such should be the case. LJ027-0159|"It is well known," likewise comments Le Conte,|"It is well known," likewise comments Le Conte, LJ027-0160|that the embryo or larva of a frog or toad, when first hatched, is a legless, tail-swimming, water-breathing, gill-breathing animal.|that the embryo or larva of a frog or toad, when first hatched, is a legless, tail-swimming, water-breathing, gill-breathing animal. LJ027-0161|It is essentially a fish, and would be so classed if it remained in this condition.|It is essentially a fish, and would be so classed if it remained in this condition. LJ027-0162|The fish retains permanently this form, but the frog passes on.|The fish retains permanently this form, but the frog passes on. LJ027-0163|Next, it forms first one pair and then another pair of legs; and meanwhile it begins to breathe also by lungs.|Next, it forms first one pair and then another pair of legs; and meanwhile it begins to breathe also by lungs. LJ027-0164|At this stage it breathes equally by lungs and by gills -- i.e., both air and water.|At this stage it breathes equally by lungs and by gills -- i.e., both air and water. LJ027-0165|Now, the lower forms of amphibians, such as siredon, menobranchus, siren, etc.,|Now, the lower forms of amphibians, such as siredon, menobranchus, siren, etc., LJ027-0166|retain permanently this form, and are therefore called "perennibranchs," but the frog still passes on.|retain permanently this form, and are therefore called "perennibranchs," but the frog still passes on. LJ027-0167|Then the gills gradually dry up, as the lungs develop, and they now breathe wholly by lungs, but still retain the tail.|Then the gills gradually dry up, as the lungs develop, and they now breathe wholly by lungs, but still retain the tail. LJ027-0168|Now this is the permanent, mature condition of many amphibians,|Now this is the permanent, mature condition of many amphibians, LJ027-0169|such as the triton, the salamander, etc., which are therefore called "caducibranchs," but the frog still passes on.|such as the triton, the salamander, etc., which are therefore called "caducibranchs," but the frog still passes on. LJ027-0170|Finally, it loses the tail, or rather its tail is absorbed and its material used in further development, and it becomes a perfect frog,|Finally, it loses the tail, or rather its tail is absorbed and its material used in further development, and it becomes a perfect frog, LJ027-0171|the highest order (anoura) of this class. Thus, then, in ontogeny the fish goes no further than the fish stages.|the highest order (anoura) of this class. Thus, then, in ontogeny the fish goes no further than the fish stages. LJ027-0172|The perennibranch passes through the fish stage to the perennibranch amphibian.|The perennibranch passes through the fish stage to the perennibranch amphibian. LJ027-0173|The caducibranch takes first the fish form, then the perennibranch form, and finally the caducibranch form, but goes no further.|The caducibranch takes first the fish form, then the perennibranch form, and finally the caducibranch form, but goes no further. LJ027-0174|Last, the anoura takes first the fish-form, then that of the perennibranch, then that of the caducibranch, and finally becomes anoura.|Last, the anoura takes first the fish-form, then that of the perennibranch, then that of the caducibranch, and finally becomes anoura. LJ027-0175|Now, this is undoubtedly the order of succession of forms in geological times -- i.e., in the phylogenic series.|Now, this is undoubtedly the order of succession of forms in geological times -- i.e., in the phylogenic series. LJ027-0176|Fishes first appeared in the Devonian and Upper Silurian in very reptilian or rather amphibian forms.|Fishes first appeared in the Devonian and Upper Silurian in very reptilian or rather amphibian forms. LJ027-0177|Then in the Carboniferous, fishes still continuing, there appeared the lowest -- i.e., most fish-like forms of amphibians.|Then in the Carboniferous, fishes still continuing, there appeared the lowest -- i.e., most fish-like forms of amphibians. LJ027-0178|These were undoubtedly perennibranchs. In the Permian and Triassic higher forms appeared, which were certainly caducibranch.|These were undoubtedly perennibranchs. In the Permian and Triassic higher forms appeared, which were certainly caducibranch. LJ027-0179|Finally, only in the Tertiary, so far as we yet know, do the highest form (anoura) appear.|Finally, only in the Tertiary, so far as we yet know, do the highest form (anoura) appear. LJ027-0180|The general similarity of the three series is complete.|The general similarity of the three series is complete. LJ028-0001|The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. By Edgar J. Banks. Chapter 2. The Walls of Babylon.|The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. By Edgar J. Banks. Chapter two. The Walls of Babylon. LJ028-0002|In the old city of Damascus you climb to the hump of a tall fleet dromedary.|In the old city of Damascus you climb to the hump of a tall fleet dromedary. LJ028-0003|With guides and guards about you, you ride through the covered bazaars crowded with dark-faced Arabs in strange costumes,|With guides and guards about you, you ride through the covered bazaars crowded with dark-faced Arabs in strange costumes, LJ028-0004|and along the narrow winding lane which was once called the "Street Called Straight.
Leaving the city by the eastern gate, and passing a small village or two,
you ascend the hill to the plateau, and before you, as far as the eye can reach, stretches the great Arabian Desert.
With mingling fear and wonder at the mystery always lying beyond the desert horizon,
you tap gently with your heel upon the shoulder of the dromedary to urge her on.
At first, paying little heed to you, she hesitates and glances anxiously about the desert as if in search of an enemy.
Now and then she reaches down to graze the thorny argool along the way.
As the taps upon her shoulder are repeated, she stretches out her long neck, and with long strides makes for the eastern horizon;
she realizes that she is bound on the long journey across the desert. Hour after hour she bears you over the hard monotonous plain.
The Damascus mosques and their minarets sink beneath the western sky.
The desert about you shows no signs of life;
only a tall column of whirling sand, rearing its head until it is lost in the blue above, moves majestically along.
In the distance your eyes detect a beautiful lake with shores fringed with trees,
but soon the phantom lake vanishes, while others, still farther beyond, appear and vanish in rapid succession.
Like a great ball of fire the sun sinks in the west.
The stars come out one by one and shine brighter than elsewhere as if to light you on your way.
Late at night the weary dromedary kneels, and on the ground, close beside her, you lie down to sleep.
Again, long before the stars have been scattered by the morning sun, you are on your way.
Day after day you travel on, scorched by the heat of noon-day, shivering in the chill winds of the night.
Two weeks pass, and at last you stand on the eastern edge of the plateau
gazing down upon the great Euphrates winding along the valley beneath.
You have crossed the Arabian Desert, the first stage of the long journey to the walls of Babylon.
Here in the valley the water is sweet and the food abundant.
For ten days you follow down the river, through little villages and black tent encampments, among scenes of strange Arab life which never lose their charm.
Everywhere the valley is dotted with the mounds of buried cities carefully guarding the secrets of the centuries of long ago.
At last you see before you a mound rising like a mountain from the level plain.
Your journey is at an end. Before you is Babylon, the "Gate of God," as the old name means.
About you is all that remains of the second of the Seven Wonders of the World.
Babylon, even in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, was an old, old city.
There is a Hebrew tradition that it was the oldest of all cities, but now we know that great empires flourished and passed away before Babylon was built.
Old King Sargon I., who may have lived as early as three thousand eight hundred B.C.,
seems to have been the first to mention Babylon, and one of his inscriptions seems to say that he built the city and gave it its name.
But in those very early days Babylon was little more than a shrine, surrounded with mud huts and date palms.
It was about 2250 B.C., when the great Hammurabi made it his capital, that it became the chief city of Babylonia.
Its history for the next fifteen hundred years or more is obscure.
We know the names of its kings, and the records speak of long wars with the Assyrians.
In the year six eighty-nine B.C., Sinacherib, King of Nineveh, captured Babylon,
tore down its palaces and temples and walls, and scraped even the foundations of the city into the river.
The place where the old city had stood for three thousand years again became a desert.
Esarhaddon, the son of Sinacherib, was the next King of Nineveh.
He rebuilt Babylon that in accordance with the ancient custom he might be crowned in the sacred city.
When Esarhaddon died, one of his sons, Samas-sum-yukin, was made King of Babylon.
Another son, Assurbanipal, or the great Sardanapalus of the Greeks, became the King of Nineveh.
War broke out between the two brothers, and again Babylon was captured.
In 626 Assurbanipal died,
and in that same year Nabopolassar, the father of the great Nebuchadnezzar, became the King of Babylon.
The building of the Babylon so famous in history began with Nabopolassar.
He enlarged the old city, erected temples, and began the construction of its walls.
In 606, Nineveh, the old enemy of Babylon, fell, never to rise again.
The next year, in 605, Nabopolassar died, and Nebuchadnezzar succeeded him to the throne.
He continued the building operations of his father, until Babylon became the greatest city of its age,
and surrounded it with walls the like of which no other city has ever seen.
Nebuchadnezzar, or Nebuchadrezzar, as his name should be spelled, was the greatest character in Babylonian history,
but about his name so many legends have grown that it is sometimes difficult to learn the facts of his life.
Early he married Amuhia, a daughter of the Medean king.
His military career began while he was still the crown prince, and his father was on the throne.
In 605,
at the head of the Babylonian army, he defeated the Egyptians in the famous battle of Carchemish, the old Hittite capital,
and drove them from Asia.
Then Syria and Palestine were added to his future empire.
In 597, when he sent his army to Jerusalem, he won the hatred of the Jews by taking Jehoiakin, the King, captive.
Eleven years later, in 586, he destroyed the sacred Hebrew city,
transported the Jews to Babylon, and brought the Hebrew kingdom to an end.
Centuries afterward, even to this day, Jewish mothers teach their children to hate his name.
They tell how he forced the exiles to carry heavy bags of sand across the desert to increase their burdens;
how he cast Hebrew lads into a fiery furnace and into the lions' den,
and how, in punishment for all his wickedness, he became a calf, and for seven years grazed the grass in the fields about the city.
Late in his life, in 567, he invaded Egypt.
During all his reign there was little peace in his great mixed turbulent empire.
The walls of the palaces of many of the Assyrian kings were lined with great stone slabs engraved with reliefs and sometimes with the portrait of a king.
But in Babylonia stone was difficult to obtain, and sculptures were very rare.
Therefore it was useless to hope that Nebuchadnezzar's portrait would be found on his palace walls.
However, several decades ago, an Oriental appeared at the Berlin Museum,
offering for sale a small cameo engraved with a helmeted head of a Greek type.
About the head was an inscription in Greek characters saying that the face was that of Nebuchadnezzar.
The museum authorities believed that the cameo was one of the many spurious objects which the Eastern forgers were constantly sending to Europe,
yet they took an impression of it, and returned it to its owner.
Years later, when the archaeologists could readily distinguish the false from the true,
it was recognized that the cameo was genuine, and that it bore the likeness of the great King.
Unfortunately, the little stone seal, perhaps the only one to preserve for us his features, appears to have been lost for ever.
Its impression shows the face of a beardless young man, intelligent and refined.
The eyes are suggestive of the Semitic; the nose is of the Greek type;
the lips are thin, the chin prominent; the neck is that of a strong vigorous man.
Such was the appearance of the builder of the walls of Babylon.
Religion and cruelty frequently go hand in hand, and Nebuchadnezzar was exceedingly religious.
Though a great warrior, it was not for his military deeds that he was best known.
He was fond of restoring the ruined temples of the old Babylonian cities,
and most of the records which have come from his time speak chiefly of his deeds of piety.
Read the introduction to any of his inscriptions, of which the following is one, and you will call him vain and proud,
but his scribe wrote it in the manner customary for the scribes of those days to write of their royal masters.
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, the exalted prince, the favorite of Marduk, the lofty patesi,
the beloved of Nabu, the arbiter, the possessor of wisdom, who seeks out the path of their divinity,
who reverences their lordship; the untiring governor, who ponders daily concerning the maintenance of Esagil and Ezida,
and is continually anxious for the shrines of Babylon and Borsippa;
the wise, the pious, the maintainer of Esagil and Ezida,
the first-born son of Nabopolassar, King of Babylon, am I.
However cruel and religiously intolerant Nebuchadnezzar may have been, he was undoubtedly the greatest builder the world has ever seen.
There is scarcely one of the thousands of ruin mounds in Babylonia which does not contain bricks bearing his name.
There is scarcely a royal record from his reign which is not chiefly occupied with descriptions of his building operations.
He rebuilt scores of the ancient temples, surrounded many cities with walls,
lined the shores of the rivers with embankments, and spanned the rivers with bridges.
Tradition says that to please his foreign wife from the mountainous country he built the famous hanging gardens, but that may be only a tradition.
His palace in Babylon was one of the world's largest buildings, but the walls with which he protected his palace and city were the wonder of the whole world.
The ancients never tired of describing them.
Fortunately in several of his long inscriptions, recently discovered in the Babylonian mounds, Nebuchadnezzar speaks of the building of the walls.
In one of them he says:
I completed Imgur-Bel and Nimitti-Bel, the great walls of Babylon, the mighty city, the city of his exalted power.
At the entrance of the great gates I erected strong bulls of bronze, and terrible serpents standing upright.
My father did that which no previous king had done.
With mortar and bricks he built two moat-walls about the city,
and I, with mortar and bricks, built a third great moat-wall, and joined it and united it closely with the moat-walls of my father.
I laid its foundation deep to the water level;
I raised its summit mountain high. I constructed a moat-wall of burned bricks about the west wall of Babylon.
My father built the moat-wall of the Arachtu canal securely with mortar and bricks.
He built well the quays along the opposite shore of the Euphrates, but he did not finish all his work,
but I, his first-born, the beloved of his heart,
built the moat-walls of Arachtu with mortar and bricks, and, joining them together with those of my father, made them very solid.
A thing which no king before had ever done:
To the west of Babylon, at a greater distance from the outer wall, I constructed an enclosing wall four thousand cubits in length about the city.
I dug its moat to the water level.
I walled up its side with mortar and burned bricks, and I united it securely with the moat-walls of my father.
Along its edge I built a great wall of mortar and burned bricks mountain high.
Berossus, a priest of the temple of Bel at Babylon, writing about 250 B.C.,
was living in the city while the walls were still standing, though in a ruinous condition.
His brief description of them should not be omitted. He says that Nebuchadnezzar
built three walls round about the inner city, and three others about that which was the outer; and this he did with burnt brick.
And after he had walled the city, and adorned its gates, he built another palace before his father's palace; but so that they joined to it:
to describe whose vast height and immense riches it would perhaps be too much for me to attempt.
Yet as large and lofty as they were, they were completed in fifteen days.
He also erected elevated places for walking, of stone; and made it resemble mountains: and built it so that it might be planted with all sorts of trees.
He also erected what is called a pensile paradise:
Of all the ancient descriptions of the famous walls and the city they protected, that of Herodotus is the fullest.
Perhaps Herodotus had never been in Babylon;
perhaps the tales that travelers told him were exaggerated as travelers' tales are likely to be,
yet he at least tried to be accurate. He says:
The city stands on a broad plain, and is an exact square, a hundred and twenty furlongs in length each way,
so that the entire circuit is four hundred and eighty furlongs.
While such is its size, in magnificence there is no other city that approaches to it.
It is surrounded, in the first place, by a broad and deep moat, full of water, behind which rises a wall
fifty royal cubits in width, and two hundred in height.
And here I may not omit to tell the use to which the mould dug out of the great moat was turned, nor the manner wherein the wall was wrought.
As fast as they dug the moat, the soil which they got from the cutting was made into bricks,
and when a sufficient number were completed they baked the bricks in kilns.
Then they set to building, and began by bricking the borders of the moat, after which they proceeded to construct the wall itself,
using throughout for their cement hot bitumen, and interposing a layer of wattled reeds at every thirtieth course of the bricks.
On the top, along the edges of the wall, they constructed buildings of a single chamber facing one another,
leaving between them room for a four-horse chariot to turn.
In the circuit of the wall are a hundred gates, all of brass, with brazen lintels and sideposts.
The bitumen used in the work was brought to Babylon from Is, a small stream which flows into the Euphrates
at the point where the city of the same name stands, eight days' journey from Babylon.
Lumps of bitumen are found in great abundance in this river.
The city is divided into two portions by the river which runs through the midst of it.
This river is the Euphrates, a broad, deep, swift stream, which rises in Armenia, and empties itself into the Erythraean Sea.
The city wall is brought down on both sides to the edge of the stream,
thence from the corners of the wall there is carried along each bank of the river a fence of burned bricks.
The houses are mostly three and four stories high;
the streets all run in straight lines, not only those parallel to the river, but also the cross streets which lead down to the waterside.
At the river end of these cross streets are low gates in the fence that skirts the stream,
which are, like the great gates in the outer wall, of brass, and open on the water.
The outer wall is the main defense of the city.
There is, however, a second inner wall, of less thickness than the first, but very little inferior to it in strength.
The center of each division of the town is occupied by a fortress.
In the one stood the palace of the kings, surrounded by a wall of great strength and size;
in the other was the sacred precinct of Jupiter Belus,
a square enclosure two furlongs each way, with gates of solid brass; which was also remaining in my time.
In the middle of the precinct there was a tower of solid masonry, a furlong in length and breadth,
upon which was raised a second tower, and on that a third, and so on up to eight.
The ascent to the top is on the outside, by a path which winds round all the towers.
When one is about halfway up, one finds a resting place and seats, where persons are wont to sit sometimes on their way to the summit.
Other ancient descriptions of the walls have been left us by Ctesias of the fifth century B.C., and by Strabo of the beginning of the Christian era,
but they add little to our knowledge.
Should we compare these ancient descriptions of the walls, we should find them hopelessly conflicting.
However, they teach us that in those early days when most cities were surrounded by enormous walls,
the walls of Babylon were so long and wide and high that all who saw them were amazed.
It is only from their ruins that we may hope to obtain accurate information of the strongest fortifications in the ancient world.
In the year 562, after a long reign of forty-three years, Nebuchadnezzar died.
He was followed by three kings whose reigns were short,
and in 555 Nabonidus, the father of the Biblical Belshazzar, came to the throne.
Cyrus, the King of Persia, was rising to power, and after he had defeated the Medes
he extended his empire to the Mediterranean and even to Egypt.
Perhaps Babylon was so strongly fortified that at first he made no attempt to add it to his empire,
but when Nabonidus joined with the King of Egypt and with the wealthy Croesus of Lydia in an alliance against him,
Cyrus decided that Babylon must be taken.
In 538 the city fell, and for a time it became the home of the Persian King.
The fall of Babylon with its lofty walls was a most important event in the history of the ancient world.
A great empire which had existed for more than three thousand years was brought to an end.
The old enemies of Babylon rejoiced.
When the news came to the Hebrews, who were held there in exile, they excitedly rushed about the streets, crying: "Babylon is fallen,"
and to them came hope of returning to Jerusalem.
But how did the "mighty city" fall? How could Cyrus take Babylon whose walls were strong enough to resist any army?
It is a long story. Poets have sung it. Historians have written it. Prophets have preached it. Legends have gathered about it.
Every child knows the story of "the writing of the hand on the wall." It was the night that Babylon fell.
Belshazzar, the King, he was really the King's son, gave a feast to a thousand of his nobles.
In the great banquet hall of the palace, when the guests were drinking from the golden cups, and the revelry was at its highest,
there suddenly appeared upon the wall an armless hand.
High up, where all might see it, the armless hand wrote the King's fate.
Thou art weighed in the balances and art found wanting.
In that night," so the story ends, "Belshazzar, the Chaldean King, was slain.
Less picturesque than this Hebrew legend is the royal record of Babylon, which fortunately was inscribed upon a clay cylinder from the ruins of the city.
It refers to the death of the King's son, possibly to Belshazzar of the Bible story.
In the month Tammuz, when Cyrus fought the troops of Akkad (Babylonia) at Opis on the river Salsallat,
he subdued the people, and wherever they collected, he slew them.
On the fourteenth day Sippar was taken without a battle.
Nabonidus fled.
On the sixteenth day the troops of Cyrus entered Babylon without a battle.
Nabonidus was taken prisoner in Babylon. On the third of Marchesvan Cyrus entered Babylon and proclaimed peace to all the city.
He appointed Gobrias governor of Babylon.
On the night of the eleventh day Gobrias killed the son of the King.
Nor does the royal record of Babylon contain the only contemporary account of the fall of the city,
for upon a barrel-shaped cylinder of clay bearing a long inscription we have Cyrus's account of his capture of Babylon. Extracts from it are as follows:
Marduk, the great lord, looking with joy on his pious works and upright heart,
commanded him (Cyrus) to go forth to his city Babylon, and he went by his side as a friend and companion.
His many troops, whose number, like the waters of the river, could not be counted, marched in full armor at his side,
Without a skirmish or a battle, he permitted them to enter Babylon, and, sparing the city, he delivered the King Nabonidus to him.
All the people of Babylon prostrated themselves before him, and, kissing his feet, rejoiced in his sovereignty, while happiness shone on their faces.
The inscription continues: I am Cyrus, king of the world.
When I made my gracious entry into Babylon, with exceeding joy I took up my abode in the royal palace.
My many troops marched peacefully into Babylon.
I gave heed to the needs of Babylon and its cities, and the servitude of the Babylonians, whatever was oppressive, I removed from them.
I quieted their sighings and soothed their sorrows.
A much longer account of the capture of Babylon by Cyrus appears in the writings of Herodotus.
Though Herodotus wrote nearly a hundred years after Babylon fell, his story seems to bear the stamp of truth.
He certainly mentions details which neither Nabonidus nor Cyrus would care to have appear in their royal records. His story is as follows:
Cyrus, with the first approach of the ensuing spring, marched forward against Babylon.
The Babylonians, encamped without their walls, awaited his coming.
A battle was fought at a short distance from the city, in which the Babylonians were defeated by the Persian King,
whereupon they withdrew within their defenses.
Here they shut themselves up and made light of his siege, having laid in a store of provision for many years in preparation against this attack;
for when they saw Cyrus conquering nation after nation, they were convinced that he would never stop, and their turn would come at last.
Cyrus was now reduced to great perplexity, as time went on and he made no progress against the place.
In this distress either someone made this suggestion to him, or he bethought himself of a plan which he proceeded to put in execution.
He placed a portion of his army at the point where the river enters the city, and another body at the back of the place where it issues forth,
with orders to march into the town by the bed of the stream, as soon as the water became shallow enough:
he then himself drew off with the unwarlike portion of his host, and made for the place where Nitocris dug the basin for the river,
where he did exactly what she had done formerly: he turned the Euphrates by a canal into the basin, which was then a marsh,
on which the river sank to such an extent that the natural bed of the stream became fordable.
Hereupon the Persians who had been left for the purpose at Babylon by the river side
entered the stream, which had now sunk so as to reach about midway up a man's thigh, and thus got into the town.
Had the Babylonians been apprised of what Cyrus was about, or had they noticed their danger, they would never have allowed the Persians to enter the city,
but would have destroyed them utterly; for they would have made fast all the street gates which gave upon the river,
and mounting upon the walls along both sides of the stream, would so have caught the enemy as it were in a trap.
But, as it was, the Persians came upon them by surprise and so took the city.
Owing to the vast size of the place, the inhabitants of the central parts (as the residents of Babylon declare),
long after the outer portions of the town were taken, knew nothing of what had chanced, but as they were engaged in a festival,
continued dancing and reveling until they learned the capture but too certainly.
Such, then, were the circumstances of the first taking of Babylon.
When Cyrus took Babylon, little or no force was employed.
Only the King's son, Belshazzar, was killed.
The city was spared; the great walls were left standing; the daily sacrifices were continued in the temples, and Cyrus made his home in the royal palace.
The people, enjoying the greater freedom which Cyrus permitted them, were contented, and life in Babylon went on about as before.
In 529 Cyrus died.
During the reigns of the two following Persian kings Babylon was slowly regaining its independence,
and in 521 Nebuchadnezzar III., a native Babylonian, was placed on the throne.
Then the Babylonians secretly plotted to throw off the Persian yoke.
That same year, when Darius Hystaspes came to the Persian throne, the Babylonians openly rebelled.
The following story from Herodotus tells the results:
At last when the time came for rebelling openly they did as follows:
having first set apart their mothers, each man chose besides out of his whole household one woman whomsoever he pleased;
these alone were allowed to live, while all the rest were brought to one place and strangled.
The women chosen were kept to make bread for the men; while the others were strangled that they might not consume the stores.
When tidings reached Darius of what had happened,
he drew together all his power and began the war by marching straight upon Babylon and laying siege to the place.
The Babylonians, however, cared not a whit for his siege.
Mounting upon the battlements that crowned their walls, they insulted and jeered at Darius and his mighty host.
One even shouted to them and said, "Why sit ye there, Persians? Why do ye not go back to your homes? Till mules foal ye will not take our city!"
This was said by a Babylonian who thought that a mule would never foal.
Now when a year and seven months had passed, Darius and his army were quite wearied out, finding that they could not anyhow take the city.
All stratagems and all arts had been used, and yet the King could not prevail
not even when he tried the means by which Cyrus had made himself master of the place.
The Babylonians were ever upon the watch, and he found no way of conquering them.
At last, in the twentieth month,
a marvelous thing happened to Zopyrus, son of the Megabyzus who was among the seven men that overthrew the Magus.
One of his sumpter-mules gave birth to a foal.
Zopyrus, when they told him, not thinking that it could be true, went and saw the colt with his own eyes;
after which he commanded his servants to tell no one what had come to pass, while he himself pondered the matter.
Calling to mind then the words of the Babylonian at the beginning of the siege:
Till mules foal ye shall not take our city, he thought, as he reflected on this speech, that Babylon might now be taken,
for it seemed to him that there was a divine providence in the man having used the phrase, and then his mule having foaled.
As soon therefore as he felt within himself that Babylon was fated to be taken, he went to Darius and asked him if he set a very high value on its conquest.
When he found that Darius did indeed value it highly, he considered further with himself how he might make the deed his own, and be the man to take Babylon.
Noble exploits in Persia are ever highly honored and bring their authors to greatness.
He therefore reviewed all ways of bringing the city under,
but found none by which he could hope to prevail, unless he maimed himself and then went over to the enemy.
To do this seeming to him a light matter, he mutilated himself in a way that was utterly without remedy.
For he cut off his own nose and ears, and then, clipping his hair close and flogging himself with a scourge,
he came in this plight before Darius.
Wrath stirred within the King at the sight of a man of his lofty rank in such a condition;
leaping down from his throne he exclaimed aloud and asked Zopyrus who it was that had disfigured him, and what he had done to be so treated.
Zopyrus answered, "There is not a man in the world, but thou, O King, that could reduce me to such a plight
no stranger's hands have wrought this work on me, but my own only.
I maimed myself because I could not endure that the Assyrians should laugh at the Persians. "Wretched man," said Darius,
thou coverest the foulest deeds with the fairest possible name, when thou sayest thy maiming is to help our siege forward.
How will thy disfigurement, thou simpleton, induce the enemy to yield one day sooner?
Surely thou hadst gone out of thy mind when thou didst so misuse thyself.
Had I told thee," rejoined the other, "what I was bent on doing, thou wouldst not have suffered it;|"Had I told thee," rejoined the other, "what I was bent on doing, thou wouldst not have suffered it; LJ028-0300|as it is, I kept my own counsel, and so accomplished my plans.|as it is, I kept my own counsel, and so accomplished my plans. LJ028-0301|Now, therefore, if there be no failure on thy part, we shall take Babylon.|Now, therefore, if there be no failure on thy part, we shall take Babylon. LJ028-0302|I will desert to the enemy as I am, and when I get into their city I will tell them that it is by thee that I have been thus treated.|I will desert to the enemy as I am, and when I get into their city I will tell them that it is by thee that I have been thus treated. LJ028-0303|I think they will believe my words and entrust me with a command of troops. Thou, on thy part, must wait|I think they will believe my words and entrust me with a command of troops. Thou, on thy part, must wait LJ028-0304|till the tenth day after I am entered within the town, and then place near to the gates of Semiramis a detachment of thy army,|till the tenth day after I am entered within the town, and then place near to the gates of Semiramis a detachment of thy army, LJ028-0305|troops for whose loss thou wilt care little, a thousand men.|troops for whose loss thou wilt care little, a thousand men. LJ028-0306|Wait, after that, seven days, and post me another detachment, two thousand strong, at the Nineveh gates;|Wait, after that, seven days, and post me another detachment, two thousand strong, at the Nineveh gates; LJ028-0307|then let twenty days pass, and at the end of that time station near the Chaldasan gates a body of four thousand.|then let twenty days pass, and at the end of that time station near the Chaldasan gates a body of four thousand. LJ028-0308|Let neither these nor the former troops be armed with any weapons but their swords those thou mayest leave them.|Let neither these nor the former troops be armed with any weapons but their swords those thou mayest leave them. LJ028-0309|After the twenty days are over, bid thy whole army attack the city on every side, and put me two bodies of Persians,|After the twenty days are over, bid thy whole army attack the city on every side, and put me two bodies of Persians, LJ028-0310|one at the Belian, the other at the Cissian gates; for I expect that, on account of my successes,|one at the Belian, the other at the Cissian gates; for I expect that, on account of my successes, LJ028-0311|the Babylonians will entrust everything, even the keys of their gates, to me. Then it will be for me and my Persians to do the rest.|the Babylonians will entrust everything, even the keys of their gates, to me. Then it will be for me and my Persians to do the rest. LJ028-0312|Having left these instructions, Zopyrus fled towards the gates of the town, often looking back, to give himself the air of a deserter.|Having left these instructions, Zopyrus fled towards the gates of the town, often looking back, to give himself the air of a deserter. LJ028-0313|The men upon the towers, whose business it was to keep a lookout,|The men upon the towers, whose business it was to keep a lookout, LJ028-0314|observing him, hastened down, and setting one of the gates slightly ajar, questioned him who he was, and on what errand he had come.|observing him, hastened down, and setting one of the gates slightly ajar, questioned him who he was, and on what errand he had come. LJ028-0315|He replied that he was Zopyrus, and deserted to them from the Persians.|He replied that he was Zopyrus, and deserted to them from the Persians. LJ028-0316|Then the doorkeepers, when they heard this, carried him at once before the Magistrates.|Then the doorkeepers, when they heard this, carried him at once before the Magistrates. LJ028-0317|Introduced into their assembly, he began to bewail his misfortunes, telling them that|Introduced into their assembly, he began to bewail his misfortunes, telling them that LJ028-0318|Darius had maltreated him in the way they could see, only because he had given advice that the siege should be raised, since there seemed no hope of taking the city.|Darius had maltreated him in the way they could see, only because he had given advice that the siege should be raised, since there seemed no hope of taking the city. LJ028-0319|"And now," he went on to say, "my coming to you, Babylonians,|"And now," he went on to say, "my coming to you, Babylonians, LJ028-0320|will prove the greatest gain that you could possibly receive, while to Darius and the Persians it will be the severest loss.|will prove the greatest gain that you could possibly receive, while to Darius and the Persians it will be the severest loss. LJ028-0321|Verily he by whom I have been so mutilated shall not escape unpunished. And truly all the paths of his counsels are known to me.|Verily he by whom I have been so mutilated shall not escape unpunished. And truly all the paths of his counsels are known to me. LJ028-0322|Thus did Zopyrus speak.|Thus did Zopyrus speak. LJ028-0323|The Babylonians, seeing a Persian of such exalted rank in so grievous a plight, his nose and ears cut off,|The Babylonians, seeing a Persian of such exalted rank in so grievous a plight, his nose and ears cut off, LJ028-0324|his body red with marks of scourging and with blood, had no suspicion but that he spoke the truth, and was really come to be their friend and helper.|his body red with marks of scourging and with blood, had no suspicion but that he spoke the truth, and was really come to be their friend and helper. LJ028-0325|They were ready, therefore, to grant him anything he asked;|They were ready, therefore, to grant him anything he asked; LJ028-0326|and on his suing for a command, they entrusted to him a body of troops with the help of which he proceeded to do as he had arranged with Darius.|and on his suing for a command, they entrusted to him a body of troops with the help of which he proceeded to do as he had arranged with Darius. LJ028-0327|On the tenth day after his flight he led out his detachment, and surrounding the thousand men,|On the tenth day after his flight he led out his detachment, and surrounding the thousand men, LJ028-0328|whom Darius according to agreement had sent first, he fell upon them and slew them all.|whom Darius according to agreement had sent first, he fell upon them and slew them all. LJ028-0329|Then the Babylonians, seeing that his deeds were as brave as his words, were beyond measure pleased, and set no bounds to their trust.|Then the Babylonians, seeing that his deeds were as brave as his words, were beyond measure pleased, and set no bounds to their trust. LJ028-0330|and when the next period agreed on had elapsed, again with a band of picked men he sallied forth, and slaughtered the two thousand.|and when the next period agreed on had elapsed, again with a band of picked men he sallied forth, and slaughtered the two thousand. LJ028-0331|After this second exploit, his praise was in all mouths.|After this second exploit, his praise was in all mouths. LJ028-0332|Once more, however, he waited till the interval appointed had gone by, and then leading the troops to the place where the four thousand were,|Once more, however, he waited till the interval appointed had gone by, and then leading the troops to the place where the four thousand were, LJ028-0333|he put them also to the sword.|he put them also to the sword. LJ028-0334|This last victory gave him the finishing stroke to his power and made him all in all with the Babylonians:|This last victory gave him the finishing stroke to his power and made him all in all with the Babylonians: LJ028-0335|accordingly they committed to him the command of their whole army, and put the keys of their city into his hands.|accordingly they committed to him the command of their whole army, and put the keys of their city into his hands. LJ028-0336|Darius now, still keeping to the plan agreed upon,|Darius now, still keeping to the plan agreed upon, LJ028-0337|attacked the walls on every side, whereupon Zopyrus played out the remainder of his stratagem.|attacked the walls on every side, whereupon Zopyrus played out the remainder of his stratagem. LJ028-0338|While the Babylonians, crowding to the walls, did their best to resist the Persian assault,|While the Babylonians, crowding to the walls, did their best to resist the Persian assault, LJ028-0339|he threw open the Cissian and Belian gates, and admitted the enemy.|he threw open the Cissian and Belian gates, and admitted the enemy. LJ028-0340|Such of the Babylonians as witnessed the treachery took refuge in the temple of Jupiter Belus;|Such of the Babylonians as witnessed the treachery took refuge in the temple of Jupiter Belus; LJ028-0341|the rest who did not see it kept at their posts, till at last they too learned that they were betrayed.|the rest who did not see it kept at their posts, till at last they too learned that they were betrayed. LJ028-0342|Thus was Babylon taken for the second time.|Thus was Babylon taken for the second time. LJ028-0343|Darius having become master of the place, destroyed the wall, and tore down all the gates;|Darius having become master of the place, destroyed the wall, and tore down all the gates; LJ028-0344|for Cyrus had done neither the one nor the other when he took Babylon.|for Cyrus had done neither the one nor the other when he took Babylon. LJ028-0345|He then chose out near three thousand of the leading citizens and caused them to be crucified, while he allowed the remainder still to inhabit the city.|He then chose out near three thousand of the leading citizens and caused them to be crucified, while he allowed the remainder still to inhabit the city. LJ028-0346|Further, wishing to prevent the race of the Babylonians from becoming extinct,|Further, wishing to prevent the race of the Babylonians from becoming extinct, LJ028-0347|he provided wives for them in the room of those whom (as I explained before) they strangled to save their stores.|he provided wives for them in the room of those whom (as I explained before) they strangled to save their stores. LJ028-0348|These he levied from the nations bordering on Babylonia,|These he levied from the nations bordering on Babylonia, LJ028-0349|who were each required to send so large a number to Babylon, that in all there were collected no fewer than fifty thousand.|who were each required to send so large a number to Babylon, that in all there were collected no fewer than fifty thousand. LJ028-0350|It is from these women that the Babylonians of our times are sprung.|It is from these women that the Babylonians of our times are sprung. LJ028-0351|As for Zopyrus he was considered by Darius to have surpassed, in the greatness of his achievements, all other Persians,|As for Zopyrus he was considered by Darius to have surpassed, in the greatness of his achievements, all other Persians, LJ028-0352|whether of former or of later times, except only Cyrus with whom no person ever yet thought himself worthy to compare.|whether of former or of later times, except only Cyrus with whom no person ever yet thought himself worthy to compare. LJ028-0353|Darius, as the story goes, would often say that "he had rather Zopyrus were unmaimed, than be master of twenty more Babylons.
And he honored Zopyrus greatly; year by year he presented him with all the gifts which are held in most esteem among the Persians;
he gave him likewise the government of Babylon for his life, free from tribute, and he also granted him many other favors.
How much truth there may be in this interesting tale of Herodotus, we may never know,
yet we may be sure that Babylon was taken by Darius only by use of stratagem. Its walls were impregnable.
Cyrus had permitted them to stand, and as long as he made Babylon his home, the city was as strongly protected as ever.
Darius, who besieged the rebellious city twice, weakened it by destroying some of its walls.
During the reign of Xerxes again the city rebelled, and in 484 B.C. he captured it, and completely demolished its defenses.
Yet Babylon continued to live,
for history mentions the names of two of its later rulers. The palace of Nebuchadnezzar was occupied by Alexander the Great,
and there on June 13, 323 B.C., he met his death.
The city then fell to Seleucus,
one of Alexander's generals, who for a time made it his home, but he was a Greek and cared little for things Babylonian.
Therefore, to destroy the power of the old capital, he planned to build Seleucia on the Tigris about fifty miles to the east.
The priests of the temple of Bel, so a story tells us,
learned of his purpose, and when they were consulted as to the most favorable time for beginning the work upon the new city,
they intentionally mentioned a most unfavorable hour.
The priests' deception was unavailing, and in 275 B.C., the inhabitants of Babylon were transported to Seleucia.
Then the world metropolis, stripped of most of its population, became a mere village.
The poor of the surrounding country occupied its dismantled palaces.
The Hebrew exiles, whose ancestors Nebuchadnezzar had brought from Jerusalem,
settled there, and finally the place was abandoned to the Arabs of the desert.
Slowly the few remaining walls fell, and were buried in their own ruins.
As the centuries passed the mounds into which the city had turned grew higher and higher with the ruins of the huts later built upon them,
until at last the foundations of the temples and palaces were buried fully a hundred feet beneath the surface.
Even the shepherds ceased to graze their sheep there, and the wandering Arabs,
fearing the wild beasts and evil spirits which lurk among all old ruins, refused to pitch their tents there.
The prophecy of the Hebrew Isaiah was fulfilled:
Wild beasts of the desert shall lie there;
and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures, and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there,
and the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces.
So Babylon was buried and forgotten.
It had become, as Dio Cassius said, "Mounds and legends and ruins."
But the walls of the old city had not yet served their full purpose.
The Sassanian kings of Persia were fond of hunting, and Babylon, then overgrown with trees, was their game preserve.
The old walls were restored to a height sufficient to prevent the escape of the animals, and among the ruins the kings enjoyed their favorite sport.
St. Jerome said:
I was informed by a certain Elamite brother, who came from those regions, and now leads the life of a monk at Jerusalem,
that there is a royal hunting ground at Babylon, and that wild game of every kind is contained within the circuit of its walls.
The statement of St. Jerome is confirmed by the following passage from Zosimus, a Greek writer of the fifth century A.D.:
As the Emperor Julian was marching forward through Babylonia,
he passed other unimportant fortresses, and came at last to a walled enclosure, which the natives pointed out as a royal hunting ground.
It was a low rampart, enclosing a wide space planted with trees of every sort, in which all kinds of beasts were shut up;
they were supplied with food by keepers, and gave the king the opportunity of hunting whenever he felt inclined.
When Julian saw this, he caused a large part of the wall to be overthrown, and as the beasts escaped they were shot down by his soldiers.
The walls of Babylon were destined to serve still another purpose.
The spread of Mohammedanism caused new cities to be built, and Babylon was the quarry for their building material.
The walls of Babylon were transformed into the sacred cities of Kerbela and Nejef.
In the eleventh century, on the site of the southern part of Babylon, the city of Hillah was built.
Hillah might be called a child of Babylon, for it is almost entirely constructed with Nebuchadnezzar's bricks.
The walls of the houses are built of them.
The courtyards and streets are paved with them, and as you walk about the city the name of Nebuchadnezzar everywhere meets your eye.
Many of the ten thousand people living in Hillah still gain their livelihood by digging the bricks from the ruins to sell to the modern builders.
The great irrigating dams across the Euphrates are constructed entirely of them.
The people of Hillah, too, are a survival of Babylonian times.
Some are Arabs of the same tribes which used to roam the desert in Nebuchadnezzar's days. Some are the children of the Hebrew exiles of old.
Some, calling themselves Christians, are the descendants of Babylonians, perhaps of Nebuchadnezzar himself.
There among the ruins they still live in the same kind of houses,
dressing the same, eating the same food as did their ancestors when Nebuchadnezzar built the walls of Babylon.
Among the first of the modern travelers to describe the ruins of Babylon was Anthony Shirley, an Englishman who visited Mesopotamia in 1599.
In his quaint way he says:
All the ground on which Babylon was spread is left now desolate; nothing standing in that Peninsula between the Euphrates and the Tigris,
but only part, and that a small part, of the great tower, which God hath suffered to stand
(if man may speak so confidently of His great impenetrable counsels), for an eternal Testimony of His great work in the confusion of Man's pride,
and that Arke of Nebuchadnezzar for as perpetual a memory of his great idolatry and condigne punishment.
About that same time Pietro della Valle, an Italian, visited Babylon,
and digging from the wall an inscribed square brick bearing the name of Nebuchadnezzar, he took it to Rome where it may still be seen.
That was the first object taken from Babylon to Europe;
it was the beginning of the great collections of Babylonian antiquities in the museums of the Western world.
Among the later visitors to Babylon was the great Niebuhr.
In 1812, James Claudius Rich, the British Resident at Baghdad, made the first complete examination of the ruins.
Porter, Layard, and Rawlinson followed him, but the real scientific exploration of Babylon and its walls
was begun by the Deutsche Orientgesellschaft, in 1889, and continued till the summer of 1915.
For fifteen years Dr. Koldewey and his assistants, with a force of two hundred native workmen, have labored there winter and summer.
The enormous amount of debris which buried the palaces and temples and walls of Nebuchadnezzar's city, in places to the depth of a hundred feet,
has been removed, and the surrounding city walls have been traced.
The excavations have shown that Babylon, as the ancients told us, was nearly square.
The Euphrates flowed through it, but the greater part of the city was on the eastern shore.
The city walls, of which the ancients were so proud, appear here and there like low ridges far out on the plain;
other parts of them have disappeared entirely.
In the northern part of the enclosure to the east of the river,
the large high mound, which resembles a mountain from a distance, still bears the ancient name Babel.
Arabs, searching for bricks, have burrowed their way down deep into it, revealing massive walls and arches.
The Germans maintain that it is the ruin of the Tower of Babel.
Here, it has been suggested, were the famous hanging gardens which some ancient authors included among the Seven Wonders of the World.
However, it is possible that the hanging gardens existed only in the imagination of the Greek writers,
for none of the many building inscriptions from Nebuchadnezzar mentions them.
Possibly along the terraces of the walls, or upon the stages of some lofty temple tower,
trees and overhanging vines were planted, and thus the travelers' tales arose.
At a distance of about two miles to the south of Babel is the larger and lower mound called the Kasr, or the Fortress,
because great masses of masonry used to project from its surface.
Deep down in the mound the Germans discovered the palace of Nebuchadnezzar with its hundreds of small chambers and its huge surrounding walls.
The mound still farther south is called Amran, because upon its summit stands the tomb of a Mohammedan saint of that name.
There lie the ruins of the famous temple of Esagil, sacred to Marduk.
Upon the little mound Jumjuma farther on, an Arab village has long stood.
All of the ancient writers agree in saying that Babylon was surrounded with both inner and outer walls, and the ruins confirm their statements.
Parts of the walls of Nineveh are still standing to the height of one hundred and twenty-five feet,
but the walls of Babylon have so long been used to supply bricks to the builders of the neighboring cities that only their bases remain.
In places even the bases have disappeared, and their moats have long been filled with the drifting sand.
The outer wall bore the name of Nimitti-Bel. Its direction was northeast and southwest, forming a triangle with the river.
The northeastern section may now be traced for a distance of less than three miles, and the southwestern "for more than a mile,
but both sections originally reached the river.
It seems that the circuit of the outer wall was about eleven miles.
The small portions of it which have been excavated suffice to show its construction.
The moat, ten feet deep, and of a width no longer known, ran close to its base. The wall was double.
Its outer part was about twenty-four feet in thickness, and its foundations, as Nebuchadnezzar said, were carried down to the water level.
Its bricks, measuring about thirteen inches square and three inches in thickness, were burned and stamped with the usual short inscription:
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, the restorer of the temples Esagil and Ezida,
the first-born son of Nabopolassar, King of Babylon.
They were laid in bitumen.
The inner part of the wall was constructed of unburned bricks, and at a distance of about thirty-six feet from the outer part.
The intervening space, which was filled with dirt probably to the upper inner edge of the outer part,
served as an elevated road where several chariots might have been driven abreast.
This inner part was about twenty-four feet wide, and at intervals of about one hundred and forty feet it was surmounted with towers.
The entire width of the outer defense, not including the moat, was therefore about eighty-two feet;
its height was probably more than double its width, but that may never be determined.
The inner wall of Babylon was called Imgur-Bel, and like the outer wall, it was double.
Time has dealt even less kindly with it, for it may be traced only for the distance of about a mile along its eastern side.
Nebuchadnezzar says that he built it of burned bricks, but only sun-dried bricks laid in mud now appear.
Its outer part, about twelve feet in width, was protected with towers at intervals of sixty-five feet.
A space of about twenty-three feet separated it from its inner part, which was about twenty feet in width.
It too was surmounted with towers.
No traces of its moat have appeared.
The entire width of this inner defense was about fifty-five feet; its height is uncertain.
To protect the sun-dried bricks of the inner wall from the winter rains
there were drains of large burned bricks, some of which bore the following long inscription:
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon,
the exalted prince, the protector of Esagil and Ezida, son of Nabopolassar, King of Babylon, am I.
Nabopolassar, the father, my begetter, built Imgur-Bel, the great wall of Babylon,
but I, the devout petitioner, the worshipper of the gods, built the moat, and made its wall of burned brick and bitumen mountain high.
O Marduk, great god, look joyfully upon the precious work of my hands. Be thou my protector.
Grant me as a gift a life of distant days.
The outer and inner defenses of Babylon were so strong and so high that no enemy could hope to take them,
yet the palace of Nebuchadnezzar was protected by a third defense far stronger.
Fortunately its walls have suffered less from the hands of the brick hunters, and the German excavators have been able to reconstruct their plan.
They may best be described by means of the accompanying diagram representing a cross section.
Had the enemy of Babylon succeeded in breaking through the outer and inner defenses of the city the royal palace would have still been far from his reach.
He would have had to cross a deep moat, to scale a wall of burned bricks about twenty feet in thickness and perhaps three times as high,
then a second wall still higher, a third and fourth and a fifth, each stronger and higher than the others,
and surmounted with towers, and then finally a sixth wall
whose summit reached into the sky as far, perhaps, as the tallest of the modern buildings.
Between the several sections were wide spaces where foot soldiers and charioteers might fight.
It must have been an imposing sight to one standing without to have seen the walls, one after another,
rising higher and higher, like a great terraced, turreted mountain.
We do not know their height, for the statements of the ancient writers disagree.
Herodotus says that it was three hundred and thirty-five feet;
Ctesias mentions three hundred feet; probably they were not far from the truth.
The ruins reach the height of about forty feet.
Nor were the walls about the palace a great mass of dull brick masonry.
The Ishtar gateway leading to the palace was encased with beautiful blue glazed bricks,
and decorated here and there with large reliefs representing bulls and lions and dragons,
designed in colors of white and blue and yellow and black.
It seems that the bricks of the reliefs were molded and glazed separately and so accurately that when built into the wall they fitted perfectly.
A modern artist would have difficulty in doing such accurate work.
Some of these decorations, the most valuable objects found in the ruins of the great city, still remain in their places on the walls;
others have been taken to the Berlin Museum.
Nebuchadnezzar speaks of great bronze gates and of images of bronze, but none have been discovered.
Probably their metal was far too valuable for the enemy to leave behind.
Should you walk along the shore of the Euphrates at Babylon, you would still see the embankments which Nebuchadnezzar constructed of bricks bearing his name,
but the river walls have disappeared, and the buttresses of the bridges have been torn or washed away.
Should you cross the river to search for the western inner wall, you would find but a small fragment of it.
The great outer wall seems to have disappeared completely beneath the desert surface.
Such were the walls of Babylon,
the strongest, the thickest, the loftiest, the most intricate, perhaps the most beautiful that ever protected a city,
walls which no ancient army was ever able to take by storm.
It is not strange, then, that they were included among the Seven Wonders of the World,
or that the Babylonian soldier stood confidently upon their summit, and jeering at the Persian army encamped below, shouted:
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 1.
This chapter describes President Kennedy's trip to Dallas, from its origin through its tragic conclusion.
The narrative of these events is based largely on the recollections of the participants,
although in many instances documentary or other evidence has also been used by the Commission.
Beginning with the advance plans and Secret Service preparations for the trip,
this chapter reviews the motorcade through Dallas, the fleeting moments of the assassination,
the activities at Parkland Memorial Hospital, and the return of the Presidential party to Washington.
An evaluation of the procedures employed to safeguard the President, with recommendations for improving these procedures, appears in Chapter 8 of the report.
Planning the Texas Trip
President Kennedy's visit to Texas in November 1963 had been under consideration for almost a year before it occurred.
He had made only a few brief visits to the State since the 1960 Presidential campaign and in 1962 he began to consider a formal visit.
During 1963, the reasons for making the trip became more persuasive.
As a political leader, the President wished to resolve the factional controversy within the Democratic Party in Texas before the election of 1964.
The party itself saw an opportunity to raise funds by having the President speak at a political dinner eventually planned for Austin.
As Chief of State, the President always welcomed the opportunity to learn, firsthand, about the problems which concerned the American people.
Moreover, he looked forward to the public appearances which he personally enjoyed. The basic decision on the November trip to Texas was made at a meeting of President Kennedy,
Vice President Johnson, and Governor Connally on June 5th, 1963, at the Cortez Hotel in El Paso, Texas.
The President had spoken earlier that day at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
and had stopped in El Paso to discuss the proposed visit and other matters with the Vice President and the Governor.
The three agreed that the President would come to Texas in late November 1963.
The original plan called for the President to spend only 1 day in the State, making whirlwind visits to Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, and Houston.
In September, the White House decided to permit further visits by the President and extended the trip to run from the afternoon of November 21
through the evening of Friday, November 22.
When Governor Connally called at the White House on October 4 to discuss the details of the visit,
it was agreed that the planning of events in Texas would be left largely to the Governor.
At the White House, Kenneth O'Donnell, special assistant to the President, acted as coordinator for the trip.
Everyone agreed that, if there was sufficient time, a motorcade through downtown Dallas would be the best way for the people to see their President.
When the trip was planned for only 1 day, Governor Connally had opposed the motorcade because there was not enough time. The Governor stated, however, that, quote,
once we got San Antonio moved from Friday to Thursday afternoon, where that was his initial stop in Texas,
then we had the time, and I withdrew my objections to a motorcade. End quote.
According to O'Donnell, quote, we had a motorcade wherever we went, end quote.
particularly in large cities where the purpose was to let the President be seen by as many people as possible.
In his experience, quote, it would be automatic, end quote, for the Secret Service to arrange a route which would, within the time allotted,
bring the President, quote, through an area which exposes him to the greatest number of people, end quote.
Advance Preparations for the Dallas Trip
Advance preparations for President Kennedy's visit to Dallas were primarily the responsibility of two Secret Service agents:
Special Agent Winston G. Lawson, a member of the White House detail who acted as the advance agent, and Forrest V. Sorrels,
special agent in charge of the Dallas office. Both agents were advised of the trip on November 4.
Lawson received a tentative schedule of the Texas trip on November 8 from Roy H. Kellerman, assistant special agent in charge of the White House detail,
who was the Secret Service official responsible for the entire Texas journey.
As advance agent working closely with Sorrels, Lawson had responsibility for arranging the timetable for the President's visit to Dallas
and coordinating local activities with the White House staff, the organizations directly concerned with the visit, and local law enforcement officials.
Lawson's most important responsibilities were to take preventive action against anyone in Dallas considered a threat to the President,
to select the luncheon site and motorcade route, and to plan security measures for the luncheon and the motorcade.
Preventive Intelligence Activities. The Protective Research Section (PRS) of the Secret Service
maintains records of people who have threatened the President or so conducted themselves as to be deemed a potential danger to him.
On November 8, 1963,
after undertaking the responsibility for advance preparations for the visit to Dallas, Agent Lawson went to the PRS offices in Washington.
A check of the geographic indexes there revealed no listing for any individual deemed to be a potential danger to the President
in the territory of the Secret Service regional office which includes Dallas and Fort Worth.
To supplement the PRS files, the Secret Service depends largely on local police departments and local offices of other Federal agencies
which advise it of potential threats immediately before the visit of the President to their community.
Upon his arrival in Dallas on November 12
Lawson conferred with the local police and the local office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about potential dangers to the President.
Although there was no mention in PRS files of the demonstration in Dallas against Ambassador Adlai Stevenson on October 24th,
1963, Lawson inquired about the incident and obtained through the local police photographs of some of the persons involved.
On November 22 a Secret Service agent stood at the entrance to the Trade Mart, where the President was scheduled to speak, with copies of these photographs.
Dallas detectives in the lobby of the Trade Mart and in the luncheon area also had copies of these photographs.
A number of people who resembled some of those in the photographs were placed under surveillance at the Trade Mart.
The FBI office in Dallas gave the local Secret Service representatives the name of a possibly dangerous individual in the Dallas area who was investigated.
It also advised the Secret Service of the circulation on November 21 of a handbill sharply critical of President Kennedy,
discussed in chapter 6 of this report.
Shortly before, the Dallas police had reported to the Secret Service that the handbill had appeared on the streets of Dallas.
Neither the Dallas police nor the FBI had yet learned the source of the handbill.
No one else was identified to the Secret Service through local inquiry as potentially dangerous,
nor did PRS develop any additional information between November 12, when Lawson left Washington, and November 22.
The adequacy of the intelligence system maintained by the Secret Service at the time of the assassination,
including a detailed description of the available data on Lee Harvey Oswald and the reasons why his name had not been furnished to the Secret Service,
is discussed in chapter 8.
An important purpose of the President's visit to Dallas was to speak at a luncheon given by business and civic leaders.
The White House staff informed the Secret Service
that the President would arrive and depart from Dallas' Love Field; that a motorcade through the downtown area of Dallas to the luncheon site should be arranged;
and that following the luncheon the President would return to the airport by the most direct route.
Accordingly, it was important to determine the luncheon site as quickly as possible, so that security could be established at the site and the motorcade route selected.
On November 4, Gerald A. Behn, agent in charge of the White House detail, asked Sorrels to examine three potential sites for the luncheon.
One building, Market Hall, was unavailable for November 22.
The second, the Women's Building at the State Fair Grounds,
was a one-story building with few entrances and easy to make secure, but it lacked necessary food-handling facilities
and had certain unattractive features, including a low ceiling with exposed conduits and beams.
The third possibility, the Trade Mart, a handsome new building with all the necessary facilities, presented security problems. It had numerous entrances,
several tiers of balconies surrounding the central court where the luncheon would be held, and several catwalks crossing the court at each level.
On November 4, Sorrels told Behn he believed security difficulties at the Trade Mart could be overcome by special precautions.
Lawson also evaluated the security hazards at the Trade Mart on November 13.
Kenneth O'Donnell made the final decision to hold the luncheon at the Trade Mart; Behn so notified Lawson on November 14.
Once the Trade Mart had been selected, Sorrels and Lawson worked out detailed arrangements for security at the building.
In addition to the preventive measures already mentioned, they provided for controlling access to the building, closing off and policing areas around it,
securing the roof and insuring the presence of numerous police officers inside and around the building.
Ultimately more than 200 law enforcement officers, mainly Dallas police but including 8 Secret Service agents,
were deployed in and around the Trade Mart.
The Motorcade Route.
On November 8, when Lawson was briefed on the itinerary for the trip to Dallas,
he was told that 45 minutes had been allotted for a motorcade procession from Love Field to the luncheon site.
Lawson was not specifically instructed to select the parade route, but he understood that this was one of his functions.
Even before the Trade Mart had been definitely selected, Lawson and Sorrels began to consider the best motorcade route from Love Field to the Trade Mart.
On November 14, Lawson and Sorrels attended a meeting at Love Field
and on their return to Dallas drove over the route which Sorrels believed best suited for the proposed motorcade.
This route, eventually selected for the motorcade from the airport to the Trade Mart, measured 10 miles and could be driven easily within the allotted 45 minutes.
From Love Field the route passed through a portion of suburban Dallas,
through the downtown area along Main Street and then to the Trade Mart via Stemmons Freeway.
For the President's return to Love Field following the luncheon, the agents selected the most direct route, which was approximately 4 miles.
After the selection of the Trade Mart as the luncheon site,
Lawson and Sorrels met with Dallas Chief of Police Jesse E. Curry, Assistant Chief Charles Batchelor,
Deputy Chief N. T. Fisher, and several other command officers to discuss details of the motorcade and possible routes.
The route was further reviewed by Lawson and Sorrels with Assistant Chief Batchelor and members of the local host committee on November 15.
The police officials agreed that the route recommended by Sorrels was the proper one and did not express a belief that any other route might be better.
On November 18,
Sorrels and Lawson drove over the selected route with Batchelor and other police officers, verifying that it could be traversed within 45 minutes.
Representatives of the local host committee and the White House staff were advised by the Secret Service of the actual route on the afternoon of November 18.
The route impressed the agents as a natural and desirable one.
Sorrels, who had participated in Presidential protection assignments in Dallas since a visit by President Franklin D. Roosevelt
in 1936, as testified that the traditional parade route in Dallas was along Main Street, since the tall buildings along the street
gave more people an opportunity to participate.
The route chosen from the airport to Main Street was the normal one, except where Harwood Street was selected as the means of access to Main Street
in preference to a short stretch of the Central Expressway, which presented a minor safety hazard
and could not accommodate spectators as conveniently as Harwood Street.
According to Lawson, the chosen route seemed to be the best.
It afforded us wide streets most of the way, because of the buses that were in the motorcade.
It afforded us a chance to have alternative routes if something happened on the motorcade route. It was the type of suburban area a good part of the way
where the crowds would be able to be controlled for a great distance, and we figured that the largest crowds would be downtown, which they were,
and that the wide streets that we would use downtown would be of sufficient width to keep the public out of our way.
Elm Street, parallel to Main Street and one block north,
was not used for the main portion of the downtown part of the motorcade because Main Street offered better vantage points for spectators.
To reach the Trade Mart from Main Street the agents decided to use the Stemmons Freeway (Route No. 77), the most direct route.
The only practical way for westbound traffic on Main Street
to reach the northbound lanes of the Stemmons Freeway is via Elm Street, which Route No. 77 traffic is instructed to follow in this part of the city.
Elm Street was to be reached from Main by turning right at Houston,
going one block north and then turning left onto Elm.
On this last portion of the journey, only 5 minutes from the Trade Mart,
the President's motorcade would pass the Texas School Book Depository Building on the northwest corner of Houston and Elm Streets.
The building overlooks Dealey Plaza, an attractively landscaped triangle of 3 acres.
From Houston Street, which forms the base of the triangle, three streets -- Commerce, Main, and Elm --
trisect the plaza, converging at the apex of the triangle to form a triple underpass beneath a multiple railroad bridge
almost 500 feet from Houston Street.
Elm Street, the northernmost of the three, after intersecting Houston curves in a southwesterly arc
through the underpass and leads into an access road,
which branches off to the right and is used by traffic going to the Stemmons Freeway and the Dallas-Fort Worth Turnpike.
The Elm Street approach to the Stemmons Freeway is necessary
in order to avoid the traffic hazards which would otherwise exist if right turns were permitted from both Main and Elm into the freeway.
To create this traffic pattern, a concrete barrier between Main and Elm Streets presents an obstacle to a right turn
from Main across Elm to the access road to Stemmons Freeway and the Dallas-Fort Worth Turnpike.
This concrete barrier extends far enough beyond the access road to make it impracticable for vehicles to turn right from Main directly to the access road.
A sign located on this barrier instructs Main Street traffic not to make any turns.
In conformity with these arrangements, traffic proceeding west on Main is directed to turn right at Houston
in order to reach the Dallas-Fort Worth Turnpike, which has the same access road from Elm Street as does the Stemmons Freeway.
The planning for the motorcade also included advance preparations for security arrangements along the route.
Sorrels and Lawson reviewed the route in cooperation with Assistant Chief Bachelor and other Dallas police officials who took notes on the requirements
for controlling the crowds and traffic, watching the overpasses, and providing motorcycle escort.
To control traffic, arrangements were made for the deployment of foot patrolmen and motorcycle police at various positions along the route.
Police were assigned to each overpass on the route and instructed to keep them clear of unauthorized persons.
No arrangements were made for police or building custodians
to inspect buildings along the motorcade route since the Secret Service did not normally request or make such a check.
Under standard procedures, the responsibility for watching the windows of buildings was shared by local police stationed along the route
and Secret Service agents riding in the motorcade.
As the date for the President's visit approached,
the two Dallas newspapers carried several reports of his motorcade route.
The selection of the Trade Mart as the possible site for the luncheon first appeared in the Dallas Times-Herald on November 15, 1963.
The following day, the newspaper reported that the Presidential party
quote, apparently will loop through the downtown area, probably on Main Street, en route from Dallas Love Field, end quote.
on its way to the Trade Mart. On November 19, the Times-Herald afternoon paper detailed the precise route:
From the airport, the President's party will proceed to Mockingbird Lane to Lemmon and then to Turtle Creek, turning south to Cedar Springs.
The motorcade will then pass through downtown on Harwood
and then west on Main, turning back to Elm at Houston and then out Stemmons Freeway to the Trade Mart.
Also on November 19, the Morning News reported that the President's motorcade would travel from Love Field along specified streets, then
Harwood to Main, Main to Houston, Houston to Elm, Elm under the Triple Underpass to Stemmons Freeway, and on to the Trade Mart.
On November 20 a front page story reported that the streets on which the Presidential motorcade would travel included "Main and Stemmons Freeway."
On the morning of the President's arrival,
the Morning News noted that the motorcade would travel through downtown Dallas onto the Stemmons Freeway, and reported that, quote, the motorcade will move slowly
so that crowds can get a good view of President Kennedy and his wife.
Dallas Before the Visit
The President's intention to pay a visit to Texas in the fall of 1963 aroused interest throughout the State.
The two Dallas newspapers provided their readers with a steady stream of information and speculation about the trip,
beginning on September 13, when the Times-Herald announced in a front page article that President Kennedy was planning a brief 1-day tour of four Texas cities
Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, and Houston
Both Dallas papers cited White House sources on September 26 as confirming the President's intention to visit Texas on November 21 and 22,
with Dallas scheduled as one of the stops.
Articles, editorials, and letters to the editor in the Dallas Morning News and the Dallas Times-Herald after September 13
reflected the feeling in the community toward the forthcoming Presidential visit.
Although there were critical editorials and letters to the editors, the news stories reflected the desire of Dallas officials to welcome the President with dignity and courtesy.
An editorial in the Times-Herald of September 17
called on the people of Dallas to be "congenial hosts" even though "Dallas didn't vote for Mr. Kennedy in 1960,
may not endorse him in '64.
On October 3 the Dallas Morning News quoted U.S. Representative Joe Pool's hope
that President Kennedy would receive a "good welcome" and would not face demonstrations like those encountered
by Vice President Johnson during the 1960 campaign.
Increased concern about the President's visit was aroused by the incident involving the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai E. Stevenson.
On the evening of October 24, 1963, after addressing a meeting in Dallas,
Stevenson was jeered, jostled, and spat upon by hostile demonstrators outside the Dallas Memorial Auditorium Theater.
The local, national, and international reaction to this incident evoked from Dallas officials and newspapers strong condemnations of the demonstrators.
Mayor Earle Cabell called on the city to redeem itself during President Kennedy's visit.
He asserted that Dallas had shed its reputation of the twenties as the, quote, Southwest hate capital of Dixie, end quote
On October 26 the press reported Chief of Police Curry's plans
to call in 100 extra off-duty officers to help protect President Kennedy.
Any thought that the President might cancel his visit to Dallas was ended
when Governor Connally confirmed on November 8 that the President would come to Texas on November 21 and 22,
and that he would visit San Antonio, Houston, Fort Worth, Dallas, and Austin.
During November the Dallas papers reported frequently on the plans for protecting the President, stressing the thoroughness of the preparations.
They conveyed the pleas of Dallas leaders that citizens not demonstrate or create disturbances during the President's visit.
On November 18 the Dallas City Council adopted a new city ordinance prohibiting interference with attendance at lawful assemblies.
Two days before the President's arrival Chief Curry warned that the Dallas police would not permit improper conduct during the President's visit.
Meanwhile, on November 17
the president of the Dallas Chamber of Commerce referred to the city's reputation for being the friendliest town in America and asserted that citizens would, quote,
greet the President of the United States with the warmth and pride that keep the Dallas spirit famous the world over, end quote,
Two days later, a local Republican leader called for a "civilized nonpartisan" welcome
for President Kennedy, stating that "in many respects Dallas County has isolated itself from the main stream of life in the world in this decade.
Another reaction to the impending visit -- hostile to the President -- came to a head shortly before his arrival.
On November 21 there appeared on the streets of Dallas the anonymous handbill mentioned above.
It was fashioned after the "wanted" circulars issued by law enforcement agencies.
Beneath two photographs of President Kennedy, one full- face and one profile, appeared the caption, quote, Wanted for Treason,
end quote, followed by a scurrilous bill of particulars that constituted a vilification of the President.
And on the morning of the President's arrival, there appeared in the Morning News a full, black-bordered advertisement headed:
Welcome Mr. Kennedy to Dallas," sponsored by the American Fact-finding Committee, which the sponsor later testified was an ad hoc committee|"Welcome Mr. Kennedy to Dallas," sponsored by the American Fact-finding Committee, which the sponsor later testified was an ad hoc committee LJ029-0213|quote, formed strictly for the purpose of having a name to put in the paper, end quote,|quote, formed strictly for the purpose of having a name to put in the paper, end quote, LJ030-0001|Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.|Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. LJ030-0002|Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 2.|Chapter two. The Assassination: Part two. LJ030-0003|Visits to Other Texas Cities|Visits to Other Texas Cities LJ030-0004|The trip to Texas began with the departure of President and Mrs. Kennedy from the White House|The trip to Texas began with the departure of President and Mrs. Kennedy from the White House LJ030-0005|by helicopter at 10:45 A.M., Eastern Standard Time, on November 21, 1963, for Andrews Air Force Base.|by helicopter at ten:forty-five A.M., Eastern Standard Time, on November twenty-one, nineteen sixty-three, for Andrews Air Force Base. LJ030-0006|They took off in the Presidential plane, Air Force One, at 11 a.m., arriving at San Antonio at 1:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time.|They took off in the Presidential plane, Air Force One, at eleven a.m., arriving at San Antonio at one:thirty p.m., Eastern Standard Time. LJ030-0007|They were greeted by Vice President Johnson and Governor Connally, who joined the Presidential party in a motorcade through San Antonio.|They were greeted by Vice President Johnson and Governor Connally, who joined the Presidential party in a motorcade through San Antonio. LJ030-0008|During the afternoon, President Kennedy dedicated the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine at Brooks Air Force Base.|During the afternoon, President Kennedy dedicated the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine at Brooks Air Force Base. LJ030-0009|Late in the afternoon he flew to Houston where he rode through the city in a motorcade,|Late in the afternoon he flew to Houston where he rode through the city in a motorcade, LJ030-0010|spoke at the Rice University Stadium, and attended a dinner in honor of U.S. Representative Albert Thomas.|spoke at the Rice University Stadium, and attended a dinner in honor of U.S. Representative Albert Thomas. LJ030-0011|At Rice Stadium a very large, enthusiastic crowd greeted the President.|At Rice Stadium a very large, enthusiastic crowd greeted the President. LJ030-0012|In Houston, as elsewhere during the trip, the crowds showed much interest in Mrs. Kennedy.|In Houston, as elsewhere during the trip, the crowds showed much interest in Mrs. Kennedy. LJ030-0013|David F. Powers of the President's staff later stated that when the President asked for his assessment of the day's activities, Powers replied|David F. Powers of the President's staff later stated that when the President asked for his assessment of the day's activities, Powers replied LJ030-0014|quote, that the crowd was about the same as the one which came to see him before but there were 100,000 extra people on hand who came to see Mrs. Kennedy.|quote, that the crowd was about the same as the one which came to see him before but there were one hundred thousand extra people on hand who came to see Mrs. Kennedy. LJ030-0015|Late in the evening, the Presidential party flew to Fort Worth where they spent the night at the Texas Hotel.|Late in the evening, the Presidential party flew to Fort Worth where they spent the night at the Texas Hotel. LJ030-0016|On the morning of November 22, President Kennedy attended a breakfast at the hotel and afterward addressed a crowd at an open parking lot.|On the morning of November twenty-two, President Kennedy attended a breakfast at the hotel and afterward addressed a crowd at an open parking lot. LJ030-0017|The President liked outdoor appearances because more people could see and hear him.|The President liked outdoor appearances because more people could see and hear him. LJ030-0018|Before leaving the hotel, the President, Mrs. Kennedy, and Kenneth O'Donnell talked about the risks inherent in Presidential public appearances.|Before leaving the hotel, the President, Mrs. Kennedy, and Kenneth O'Donnell talked about the risks inherent in Presidential public appearances. LJ030-0019|According to O'Donnell, the President commented that, quote,|According to O'Donnell, the President commented that, quote, LJ030-0020|if anybody really wanted to shoot the President of the United States, it was not a very difficult job|if anybody really wanted to shoot the President of the United States, it was not a very difficult job LJ030-0021|all one had to do was get a high building someday with a telescopic rifle, and there was nothing anybody could do to defend against such an attempt.|all one had to do was get a high building someday with a telescopic rifle, and there was nothing anybody could do to defend against such an attempt. LJ030-0022|Upon concluding the conversation, the President prepared to depart for Dallas.|Upon concluding the conversation, the President prepared to depart for Dallas. LJ030-0023|Arrival at Love Field|Arrival at Love Field LJ030-0024|In Dallas the rain had stopped, and by midmorning a gloomy overcast sky had given way to the bright sunshine that greeted the Presidential party|In Dallas the rain had stopped, and by midmorning a gloomy overcast sky had given way to the bright sunshine that greeted the Presidential party LJ030-0025|when Air Force One touched down at Love Field at 11:40 a.m., Eastern Standard Time.|when Air Force One touched down at Love Field at eleven:forty a.m., Eastern Standard Time. LJ030-0026|Governor and Mrs. Connally and Senator Ralph W. Yarborough had come with the President from Fort Worth.|Governor and Mrs. Connally and Senator Ralph W. Yarborough had come with the President from Fort Worth. LJ030-0027|Vice President Johnson's airplane, Air Force Two, had arrived at Love Field at approximately 11:35 a.m.,|Vice President Johnson's airplane, Air Force Two, had arrived at Love Field at approximately eleven:thirty-five a.m., LJ030-0028|and the Vice President and Mrs. Johnson were in the receiving line to greet President and Mrs. Kennedy.|and the Vice President and Mrs. Johnson were in the receiving line to greet President and Mrs. Kennedy. LJ030-0029|After a welcome from the Dallas reception committee,|After a welcome from the Dallas reception committee, LJ030-0030|President and Mrs. Kennedy walked along a chain-link fence at the reception area greeting a large crowd of spectators that had gathered behind it.|President and Mrs. Kennedy walked along a chain-link fence at the reception area greeting a large crowd of spectators that had gathered behind it. LJ030-0031|Secret Service agents formed a cordon to keep the press and photographers from impeding their passage and scanned the crowd for threatening movements.|Secret Service agents formed a cordon to keep the press and photographers from impeding their passage and scanned the crowd for threatening movements. LJ030-0032|Dallas police stood at intervals along the fence and Dallas plain clothes men mixed in the crowd.|Dallas police stood at intervals along the fence and Dallas plain clothes men mixed in the crowd. LJ030-0033|Vice President and Mrs. Johnson followed along the fence, guarded by four members of the Vice-Presidential detail.|Vice President and Mrs. Johnson followed along the fence, guarded by four members of the Vice-Presidential detail. LJ030-0034|Approximately 10 minutes after the arrival at Love Field, the President and Mrs. Kennedy went to the Presidential automobile to begin the motorcade.|Approximately ten minutes after the arrival at Love Field, the President and Mrs. Kennedy went to the Presidential automobile to begin the motorcade. LJ030-0035|Organization of the Motorcade|Organization of the Motorcade LJ030-0036|Secret Service arrangements for Presidential trips, which were followed in the Dallas motorcade,|Secret Service arrangements for Presidential trips, which were followed in the Dallas motorcade, LJ030-0037|are designed to provide protection while permitting large numbers of people to see the President.|are designed to provide protection while permitting large numbers of people to see the President. LJ030-0038|Every effort is made to prevent unscheduled stops, although the President may, and in Dallas did, order stops in order to greet the public.|Every effort is made to prevent unscheduled stops, although the President may, and in Dallas did, order stops in order to greet the public. LJ030-0039|Men the motorcade slows or stops, agents take positions between the President and the crowd.|Men the motorcade slows or stops, agents take positions between the President and the crowd. LJ030-0040|The order of vehicles in the Dallas motorcade was as follows:|The order of vehicles in the Dallas motorcade was as follows: LJ030-0041|Motorcycles. -- Dallas police motorcycles preceded the pilot car.|Motorcycles. -- Dallas police motorcycles preceded the pilot car. LJ030-0042|Manned by officers of the Dallas Police Department, this automobile preceded the main party by approximately quarter of a mile.|Manned by officers of the Dallas Police Department, this automobile preceded the main party by approximately quarter of a mile. LJ030-0043|Its function was to alert police along the route that the motorcade was approaching and to check for signs of trouble.|Its function was to alert police along the route that the motorcade was approaching and to check for signs of trouble. LJ030-0044|Motorcycles. -- Next came four to six motorcycle policemen whose main purpose was to keep the crowd back.|Motorcycles. -- Next came four to six motorcycle policemen whose main purpose was to keep the crowd back. LJ030-0045|The lead car. -- Described as a "rolling command car," this was an unmarked Dallas police car, driven by Chief of Police Curry|The lead car. -- Described as a "rolling command car," this was an unmarked Dallas police car, driven by Chief of Police Curry LJ030-0046|and occupied by Secret Service Agents Sorrels and Lawson and by Dallas County Sheriff J. E. Decker.|and occupied by Secret Service Agents Sorrels and Lawson and by Dallas County Sheriff J. E. Decker. LJ030-0047|The occupants scanned the crowd and the buildings along the route.|The occupants scanned the crowd and the buildings along the route. LJ030-0048|Their main function was to spot trouble in advance and to direct any necessary steps to meet the trouble.|Their main function was to spot trouble in advance and to direct any necessary steps to meet the trouble. LJ030-0049|Following normal practice, the lead automobile stayed approximately 4 to 5 car lengths ahead of the President's limousine.|Following normal practice, the lead automobile stayed approximately four to five car lengths ahead of the President's limousine. LJ030-0050|The Presidential limousine.|The Presidential limousine. LJ030-0051|The President's automobile was specially designed 1961 Lincoln convertible|The President's automobile was specially designed nineteen sixty-one Lincoln convertible LJ030-0052|with two collapsible jump seats between the front and rear seats.|with two collapsible jump seats between the front and rear seats. LJ030-0053|It was outfitted with a clear plastic bubbletop which was neither bulletproof nor bullet resistant.|It was outfitted with a clear plastic bubbletop which was neither bulletproof nor bullet resistant. LJ030-0054|Because the skies had cleared in Dallas, Lawson directed that the top not be used for the day's activities.|Because the skies had cleared in Dallas, Lawson directed that the top not be used for the day's activities. LJ030-0055|He acted on instructions he had received earlier from Assistant Special Agent in Charge Roy H. Kellerman, who was in Fort Worth with the President.|He acted on instructions he had received earlier from Assistant Special Agent in Charge Roy H. Kellerman, who was in Fort Worth with the President. LJ030-0056|Kellerman had discussed the matter with O'Donnell, whose instructions were, quote,|Kellerman had discussed the matter with O'Donnell, whose instructions were, quote, LJ030-0057|If the weather is clear and it is not raining, have that bubbletop off, end quote,|If the weather is clear and it is not raining, have that bubbletop off, end quote, LJ030-0058|Elevated approximately 15 inches above the back of the front seat|Elevated approximately fifteen inches above the back of the front seat LJ030-0059|was a metallic frame with four handholds that riders in the car could grip while standing in the rear seat during parades.|was a metallic frame with four handholds that riders in the car could grip while standing in the rear seat during parades. LJ030-0060|At the rear on each side of the automobile were small running boards, each designed to hold a Secret Service agent,|At the rear on each side of the automobile were small running boards, each designed to hold a Secret Service agent, LJ030-0061|with a metallic handle for the rider to grasp.|with a metallic handle for the rider to grasp. LJ030-0062|The President had frequently stated that he did not want agents to ride on these steps during a motorcade except when necessary.|The President had frequently stated that he did not want agents to ride on these steps during a motorcade except when necessary. LJ030-0063|He had repeated this wish only a few days before, during his visit to Tampa, Florida.|He had repeated this wish only a few days before, during his visit to Tampa, Florida. LJ030-0064|President Kennedy rode on the right-hand side of the rear seat with Mrs. Kennedy on his left.|President Kennedy rode on the right-hand side of the rear seat with Mrs. Kennedy on his left. LJ030-0065|Governor Connally occupied the right jump seat, Mrs. Connally the left.|Governor Connally occupied the right jump seat, Mrs. Connally the left. LJ030-0066|Driving the Presidential limousine was Special Agent William R. Greer of the Secret Service;|Driving the Presidential limousine was Special Agent William R. Greer of the Secret Service; LJ030-0067|on his right sat Kellerman.|on his right sat Kellerman. LJ030-0068|Kellerman's responsibilities included maintaining radio communications with the lead and follow-up cars,|Kellerman's responsibilities included maintaining radio communications with the lead and follow-up cars, LJ030-0069|scanning the route, and getting out and standing near the President when the cars stopped.|scanning the route, and getting out and standing near the President when the cars stopped. LJ030-0070|Motorcycles. -- Four motorcycles, two on each side, flanked the rear of the Presidential car.|Motorcycles. -- Four motorcycles, two on each side, flanked the rear of the Presidential car. LJ030-0071|They provided some cover for the President, but their main purpose was to keep back the crowd.|They provided some cover for the President, but their main purpose was to keep back the crowd. LJ030-0072|On previous occasions, the President had requested that, to the extent possible, these flanking motorcycles keep back from the sides of his car.|On previous occasions, the President had requested that, to the extent possible, these flanking motorcycles keep back from the sides of his car. LJ030-0073|Presidential follow-up car.|Presidential follow-up car. LJ030-0074|This vehicle, a 1955 Cadillac eight-passenger convertible especially outfitted for the Secret Service,|This vehicle, a nineteen fifty-five Cadillac eight-passenger convertible especially outfitted for the Secret Service, LJ030-0075|followed closely behind the President's automobile.|followed closely behind the President's automobile. LJ030-0076|It carried eight Secret Service agents -- two in the front seat, two in the rear, and two on each of the right and left running boards.|It carried eight Secret Service agents -- two in the front seat, two in the rear, and two on each of the right and left running boards. LJ030-0077|Each agent carried a .38-caliber pistol, and a shotgun and automatic rifle were also available.|Each agent carried a thirty-eight-caliber pistol, and a shotgun and automatic rifle were also available. LJ030-0078|Presidential Assistants David F. Powers and Kenneth O'Donnell sat in the right and left jump seats, respectively.|Presidential Assistants David F. Powers and Kenneth O'Donnell sat in the right and left jump seats, respectively. LJ030-0079|The agents in this car, under established procedure, had instructions to watch the route for signs of trouble,|The agents in this car, under established procedure, had instructions to watch the route for signs of trouble, LJ030-0080|scanning not only the crowds but the windows and roofs of buildings, overpasses, and crossings.|scanning not only the crowds but the windows and roofs of buildings, overpasses, and crossings. LJ030-0081|They were instructed to watch particularly for thrown objects, sudden actions in the crowd, and any movements toward the Presidential car.|They were instructed to watch particularly for thrown objects, sudden actions in the crowd, and any movements toward the Presidential car. LJ030-0082|The agents on the front of the running boards had directions to move immediately to positions just to the rear of the President and Mrs. Kennedy when the President's car slowed|The agents on the front of the running boards had directions to move immediately to positions just to the rear of the President and Mrs. Kennedy when the President's car slowed LJ030-0083|to a walking pace or stopped,|to a walking pace or stopped, LJ030-0084|or when the press of the crowd made it impossible for the escort motorcycles to stay in position on the car's rear flanks.|or when the press of the crowd made it impossible for the escort motorcycles to stay in position on the car's rear flanks. LJ030-0085|The two agents on the rear of the running boards were to advance toward the front of the President's car whenever it stopped or slowed down sufficiently for them to do so.|The two agents on the rear of the running boards were to advance toward the front of the President's car whenever it stopped or slowed down sufficiently for them to do so. LJ030-0086|Vice-Presidential car.|Vice-Presidential car. LJ030-0087|The Vice-Presidential automobile, a four-door Lincoln convertible obtained locally for use in the motorcade,|The Vice-Presidential automobile, a four-door Lincoln convertible obtained locally for use in the motorcade, LJ030-0088|proceeded approximately two to three car lengths behind the President's follow-up car.|proceeded approximately two to three car lengths behind the President's follow-up car. LJ030-0089|This distance was maintained so that spectators would normally turn their gaze from the President's automobile by the time the Vice President came into view.|This distance was maintained so that spectators would normally turn their gaze from the President's automobile by the time the Vice President came into view. LJ030-0090|Vice President Johnson sat on the right-hand side of the rear seat, Mrs. Johnson in the center, and Senator Yarborough on the left.|Vice President Johnson sat on the right-hand side of the rear seat, Mrs. Johnson in the center, and Senator Yarborough on the left. LJ030-0091|Rufus W. Youngblood, special agent in charge of the Vice President's detail,|Rufus W. Youngblood, special agent in charge of the Vice President's detail, LJ030-0092|occupied the right-hand side of the front seat, and Hurchel Jacks of the Texas State Highway patrol was the driver.|occupied the right-hand side of the front seat, and Hurchel Jacks of the Texas State Highway patrol was the driver. LJ030-0093|Vice-Presidential follow-up car.|Vice-Presidential follow-up car. LJ030-0094|Driven by an officer of the Dallas Police Department,|Driven by an officer of the Dallas Police Department, LJ030-0095|this vehicle was occupied by three Secret Service agents and Clifton C. Garter, assistant to the Vice President.|this vehicle was occupied by three Secret Service agents and Clifton C. Garter, assistant to the Vice President. LJ030-0096|These agents performed for the Vice President the same functions that the agents in the Presidential follow-up car performed for the President.|These agents performed for the Vice President the same functions that the agents in the Presidential follow-up car performed for the President. LJ030-0097|Remainder of motorcade.|Remainder of motorcade. LJ030-0098|The remainder of the motorcade consisted of five cars for other dignitaries, including the mayor of Dallas and Texas Congressmen,|The remainder of the motorcade consisted of five cars for other dignitaries, including the mayor of Dallas and Texas Congressmen, LJ030-0099|telephone and Western Union vehicles, a White House communications car,|telephone and Western Union vehicles, a White House communications car, LJ030-0100|three cars for press photographers, an official party bus for White House staff members and others, and two press buses.|three cars for press photographers, an official party bus for White House staff members and others, and two press buses. LJ030-0101|Admiral George G. Burkley, physician to the President,|Admiral George G. Burkley, physician to the President, LJ030-0102|was in a car following those, quote, containing the local and national representatives, end quote,|was in a car following those, quote, containing the local and national representatives, end quote, LJ030-0103|Police car and motorcycles.|Police car and motorcycles. LJ030-0104|A Dallas police car and several motorcycles at the rear kept the motorcade together and prevented unauthorized vehicles from joining the motorcade.|A Dallas police car and several motorcycles at the rear kept the motorcade together and prevented unauthorized vehicles from joining the motorcade. LJ030-0105|Communications in the motorcade.|Communications in the motorcade. LJ030-0106|A base station at a fixed location in Dallas operated a radio network which linked together the lead car,|A base station at a fixed location in Dallas operated a radio network which linked together the lead car, LJ030-0107|Presidential car, Presidential follow-up car,|Presidential car, Presidential follow-up car, LJ030-0108|White House communications car, Trade Mart, Love Field, and the Presidential and Vice-Presidential airplanes.|White House communications car, Trade Mart, Love Field, and the Presidential and Vice-Presidential airplanes. LJ030-0109|The Vice-Presidential car|The Vice-Presidential car LJ030-0110|and Vice-Presidential follow-up car used portable sets with a separate frequency for their own car-to-car communication.|and Vice-Presidential follow-up car used portable sets with a separate frequency for their own car-to-car communication. LJ030-0111|The Drive through Dallas|The Drive through Dallas LJ030-0112|The motorcade left Love Field shortly after 11:50 a.m. and drove at speeds up to 25 to 30 miles an hour|The motorcade left Love Field shortly after eleven:fifty a.m. and drove at speeds up to twenty-five to thirty miles an hour LJ030-0113|through thinly populated areas on the outskirts of Dallas.|through thinly populated areas on the outskirts of Dallas. LJ030-0114|At the President's direction, his automobile stopped twice, the first time to permit him to respond to a sign asking him to shake hands.|At the President's direction, his automobile stopped twice, the first time to permit him to respond to a sign asking him to shake hands. LJ030-0115|During this brief stop, agents in the front positions on the running boards of the Presidential follow-up car came forward and stood beside the President's car,|During this brief stop, agents in the front positions on the running boards of the Presidential follow-up car came forward and stood beside the President's car, LJ030-0116|looking out toward the crowd, and Special Agent Kellerman assumed his position next to the car.|looking out toward the crowd, and Special Agent Kellerman assumed his position next to the car. LJ030-0117|On the other occasion, the President halted the motorcade to speak to a Catholic nun and a group of small children.|On the other occasion, the President halted the motorcade to speak to a Catholic nun and a group of small children. LJ030-0118|In the downtown area, large crowds of spectators gave the President a tremendous reception.|In the downtown area, large crowds of spectators gave the President a tremendous reception. LJ030-0119|The crowds were so dense that Special Agent Clinton J. Hill|The crowds were so dense that Special Agent Clinton J. Hill LJ030-0120|had to leave the left front running board of the President's follow-up car four times to ride on the rear of the President's limousine.|had to leave the left front running board of the President's follow-up car four times to ride on the rear of the President's limousine. LJ030-0121|Several times Special Agent John D. Ready came forward from the right front running board of the Presidential follow-up car|Several times Special Agent John D. Ready came forward from the right front running board of the Presidential follow-up car LJ030-0122|to the right side of the President's car.|to the right side of the President's car. LJ030-0123|Special Agent Glen A. Bennett once left his place inside the follow-up car to help keep the crowd away from the President's car.|Special Agent Glen A. Bennett once left his place inside the follow-up car to help keep the crowd away from the President's car. LJ030-0124|When a teenage boy ran toward the rear of the President's car, Ready left the running board to chase the boy back into the crowd.|When a teenage boy ran toward the rear of the President's car, Ready left the running board to chase the boy back into the crowd. LJ030-0125|On several occasions when the Vice President's car was slowed down by the throng, Special Agent Youngblood stepped out to hold the crowd back.|On several occasions when the Vice President's car was slowed down by the throng, Special Agent Youngblood stepped out to hold the crowd back. LJ030-0126|According to plan, the President's motorcade proceeded west through downtown Dallas on Main Street|According to plan, the President's motorcade proceeded west through downtown Dallas on Main Street LJ030-0127|to the intersection of Houston Street, which marks the beginning of Dealey Plaza.|to the intersection of Houston Street, which marks the beginning of Dealey Plaza. LJ030-0128|From Main Street the motorcade turned right and went north on Houston Street, passing tall buildings on the right,|From Main Street the motorcade turned right and went north on Houston Street, passing tall buildings on the right, LJ030-0129|and headed toward the Texas School Book Depository Building.|and headed toward the Texas School Book Depository Building. LJ030-0130|The spectators were still thickly congregated in front of the buildings which lined the east side of Houston Street, but the crowd thinned abruptly along Elm Street,|The spectators were still thickly congregated in front of the buildings which lined the east side of Houston Street, but the crowd thinned abruptly along Elm Street, LJ030-0131|which curves in a southwesterly direction as it proceeds downgrade toward the Triple Underpass and the Stemmons Freeway.|which curves in a southwesterly direction as it proceeds downgrade toward the Triple Underpass and the Stemmons Freeway. LJ030-0132|As the motorcade approached the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets, there was general gratification in the Presidential party about the enthusiastic reception.|As the motorcade approached the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets, there was general gratification in the Presidential party about the enthusiastic reception. LJ030-0133|Evaluating the political overtones, Kenneth O'Donnell was especially pleased|Evaluating the political overtones, Kenneth O'Donnell was especially pleased LJ030-0134|because it convinced him that the average Dallas resident was like other American citizens in respecting and admiring the President.|because it convinced him that the average Dallas resident was like other American citizens in respecting and admiring the President. LJ030-0135|Mrs. Connally, elated by the reception, turned to President Kennedy and said, quote, Mr. President, you can't say Dallas doesn't love you.|Mrs. Connally, elated by the reception, turned to President Kennedy and said, quote, Mr. President, you can't say Dallas doesn't love you. LJ030-0136|end quote, the President replied, "That is very obvious.
The Assassination
At 12:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, as the President's open limousine proceeded at approximately 11 miles per hour along Elm Street
toward the Triple Underpass, shots fired from a rifle mortally wounded President Kennedy and seriously injured Governor Connally.
One bullet passed through the President's neck;
a subsequent bullet, which was lethal, shattered the right side of his skull.
Governor Connally sustained bullet wounds in his back, the right side of his chest, right wrist, and left thigh.
The exact time of the assassination was fixed by the testimony of four witnesses.
Special Agent Rufus W. Youngblood observed that the large electric sign clock atop the Texas School Book Depository Building
showed the numerals 12:30 as the Vice-Presidential automobile proceeded north on Houston Street, a few seconds before the shots were fired.
Just prior to the shooting, David F. Powers, riding in the Secret Service follow-up car, remarked to Kenneth O'Donnell
that it was 12:30 p.m., the time they were due at the Trade Mart.
Seconds after the shooting, Roy Kellerman, riding in the front seat of the Presidential limousine,
looked at his watch and said "12:30" to the driver, Special Agent Greer.
The Dallas police radio log reflects that Chief of Police Curry reported the shooting of the President
and issued his initial orders at 12:30 p.m.
Speed of the Limousine
William Greer, operator of the Presidential limousine, estimated the car's speed at the time of the first shot as 12 to 15 miles per hour.
Other witnesses in the motorcade estimated the speed of the President's limousine from 7 to 22 miles per hour.
A more precise determination has been made from motion pictures taken on the scene by an amateur photographer, Abraham Zapruder.
Based on these films, the speed of the President's automobile is computed at an average speed of 11.2 miles per hour.
The car maintained this average speed over a distance of approximately 186 feet immediately preceding the shot which struck the President in the head.
While the car traveled this distance, the Zapruder camera ran 152 frames.
Since the camera operates at a speed of 18.3 frames per second,
it was calculated that the car required 8.3 seconds to cover the 136 feet.
This represents a speed of 11.2 miles per hour.
In the Presidential Limousine
Mrs. John F. Kennedy, on the left of the rear seat of the limousine, looked toward her left and waved to the crowds along the route.
Soon after the motorcade turned onto Elm Street, she heard a sound similar to a motorcycle noise and a cry from Governor Connally,
which caused her to look to her right.
On turning she saw a quizzical look on her husband's face as he raised his left hand to his throat.
Mrs. Kennedy then heard a second shot and saw the President's skull torn open under the impact of the bullet.
As she cradled her mortally wounded husband, Mrs. Kennedy cried, quote,
Oh, my God, they have shot my husband. I love you, Jack.
Governor Connally testified that he recognized the first noise as a rifle shot
and the thought immediately crossed his mind that it was an assassination attempt.
From his position in the right jump seat immediately in front of the President,
he instinctively turned to his right because the shot appeared to come from over his right shoulder.
Unable to see the President as he turned to the right,
the Governor started to look back over his left shoulder, but he never completed the turn because he felt something strike him in the back.
In his testimony before the Commission, Governor Connally was certain that he was hit by the second shot, which he stated he did not hear.
Mrs. Connally, too, heard a frightening noise from her right.
Looking over her right shoulder, she saw that the President had both hands at his neck but she observed no blood and heard nothing.
She watched as he slumped down with an empty expression on his face.
Roy Kellerman, in the right front seat of the limousine, heard a report like a firecracker pop.
Turning to his right in the direction of the noise, Kellerman heard the President say
My God, I am hit," and saw both of the President's hands move up toward his neck.|"My God, I am hit," and saw both of the President's hands move up toward his neck. LJ030-0183|As he told the driver, quote, Let's get out of here; we are hit, end quote,|As he told the driver, quote, Let's get out of here; we are hit, end quote, LJ030-0184|Kellerman grabbed his microphone and radioed ahead to the lead car,|Kellerman grabbed his microphone and radioed ahead to the lead car, LJ030-0185|quote, we are hit. Get us to the hospital immediately, end quote.|quote, we are hit. Get us to the hospital immediately, end quote. LJ030-0186|The driver, William Greer, heard a noise which he took to be a backfire from one of the motorcycles flanking the Presidential car.|The driver, William Greer, heard a noise which he took to be a backfire from one of the motorcycles flanking the Presidential car. LJ030-0187|When he heard the same noise again, Greer glanced over his shoulder and saw Governor Connally fall.|When he heard the same noise again, Greer glanced over his shoulder and saw Governor Connally fall. LJ030-0188|At the sound of the second shot|At the sound of the second shot LJ030-0189|he realized that something was wrong, and he pressed down on the accelerator as Kellerman said, quote, Get out of here fast, end quote.|he realized that something was wrong, and he pressed down on the accelerator as Kellerman said, quote, Get out of here fast, end quote. LJ030-0190|As he issued his instructions to Greer and to the lead car, Kellerman heard a flurry of shots within 5 seconds of the first noise.|As he issued his instructions to Greer and to the lead car, Kellerman heard a flurry of shots within five seconds of the first noise. LJ030-0191|According to Kellerman, Mrs. Kennedy then cried out, quote,|According to Kellerman, Mrs. Kennedy then cried out, quote, LJ030-0192|What are they doing to you! end quote. Looking back from the front seat,|What are they doing to you! end quote. Looking back from the front seat, LJ030-0193|Kellerman saw Governor Connally in his wife's lap and Special Agent Clinton J. Hill lying across the trunk of the car.|Kellerman saw Governor Connally in his wife's lap and Special Agent Clinton J. Hill lying across the trunk of the car. LJ030-0194|Mrs. Connally heard a second shot fired and pulled her husband down into her lap.|Mrs. Connally heard a second shot fired and pulled her husband down into her lap. LJ030-0195|Observing his blood-covered chest as he was pulled into his wife's lap, Governor Connally believed himself mortally wounded.|Observing his blood-covered chest as he was pulled into his wife's lap, Governor Connally believed himself mortally wounded. LJ030-0196|He cried out, quote, Oh, no, no, no. My God, they are going to kill us all, end quote,|He cried out, quote, Oh, no, no, no. My God, they are going to kill us all, end quote, LJ030-0197|At first Mrs. Connally thought that her husband had been killed,|At first Mrs. Connally thought that her husband had been killed, LJ030-0198|but then she noticed an almost imperceptible movement and knew that he was still alive. She said, quote, It's all right. Be still, end quote,|but then she noticed an almost imperceptible movement and knew that he was still alive. She said, quote, It's all right. Be still, end quote, LJ030-0199|The Governor was lying with his head on his wife's lap when he heard a shot hit the President.|The Governor was lying with his head on his wife's lap when he heard a shot hit the President. LJ030-0200|At that point, both Governor and Mrs. Connally observed brain tissue splattered over the interior of the car.|At that point, both Governor and Mrs. Connally observed brain tissue splattered over the interior of the car. LJ030-0201|According to Governor and Mrs. Connally, it was after this shot that Kellerman issued his emergency instructions and the car accelerated.|According to Governor and Mrs. Connally, it was after this shot that Kellerman issued his emergency instructions and the car accelerated. LJ030-0202|Reaction by Secret Service Agents|Reaction by Secret Service Agents LJ030-0203|From the left front running board of the President's follow-up car,|From the left front running board of the President's follow-up car, LJ030-0204|Special Agent Hill was scanning the few people standing on the south side of Elm Street after the motorcade had turned off Houston Street.|Special Agent Hill was scanning the few people standing on the south side of Elm Street after the motorcade had turned off Houston Street. LJ030-0205|He estimated that the motorcade had slowed down to approximately 9 or 10 miles per hour|He estimated that the motorcade had slowed down to approximately nine or ten miles per hour LJ030-0206|on the turn at the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets and then proceeded at a rate of 12 to 15 miles per hour|on the turn at the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets and then proceeded at a rate of twelve to fifteen miles per hour LJ030-0207|with the follow-up car trailing the President's automobile by approximately 5 feet.|with the follow-up car trailing the President's automobile by approximately five feet. LJ030-0208|Hill heard a noise, which seemed to be a firecracker, coming from his right rear.|Hill heard a noise, which seemed to be a firecracker, coming from his right rear. LJ030-0209|He immediately looked to his right, quote, and, in so doing, my eyes had to cross the Presidential limousine|He immediately looked to his right, quote, and, in so doing, my eyes had to cross the Presidential limousine LJ030-0210|and I saw President Kennedy grab at himself and lurch forward and to the left, end quote.|and I saw President Kennedy grab at himself and lurch forward and to the left, end quote. LJ030-0211|Hill jumped from the follow-up car and ran to the President's automobile.|Hill jumped from the follow-up car and ran to the President's automobile. LJ030-0212|At about the time he reached the President's automobile,|At about the time he reached the President's automobile, LJ030-0213|Hill heard a second shot, proximately 5 seconds after the first, which removed a portion of the President's head.|Hill heard a second shot, proximately five seconds after the first, which removed a portion of the President's head. LJ030-0214|At the instant that Hill stepped onto the left rear step of the President's automobile and grasped the handhold,|At the instant that Hill stepped onto the left rear step of the President's automobile and grasped the handhold, LJ030-0215|the car lurched forward, causing him to lose his footing. He ran three or four steps, regained his position and mounted the car.|the car lurched forward, causing him to lose his footing. He ran three or four steps, regained his position and mounted the car. LJ030-0216|Between the time he originally seized the handhold and the time he mounted the car, Hill recalled:|Between the time he originally seized the handhold and the time he mounted the car, Hill recalled: LJ030-0217|quote, Mrs. Kennedy had jumped up from the seat and was, it appeared to me, reaching for something coming off the fight rear bumper of the car,|quote, Mrs. Kennedy had jumped up from the seat and was, it appeared to me, reaching for something coming off the fight rear bumper of the car, LJ030-0218|the right rear tail, when she noticed that I was trying to climb on the car.|the right rear tail, when she noticed that I was trying to climb on the car. LJ030-0219|She turned toward me and I grabbed her and put her back in the back seat, crawled up on top of the back seat and lay there.|She turned toward me and I grabbed her and put her back in the back seat, crawled up on top of the back seat and lay there. LJ030-0220|David Powers, who witnessed the scene from the President's follow-up car,|David Powers, who witnessed the scene from the President's follow-up car, LJ030-0221|stated that Mrs. Kennedy would probably have fallen off the rear end of the car and been killed if Hill had not pushed her back into the Presidential automobile.|stated that Mrs. Kennedy would probably have fallen off the rear end of the car and been killed if Hill had not pushed her back into the Presidential automobile. LJ030-0222|Mrs. Kennedy had no recollection of climbing onto the back of the car.|Mrs. Kennedy had no recollection of climbing onto the back of the car. LJ030-0223|Special Agent Ready, on the right front running board of the Presidential follow-up car,|Special Agent Ready, on the right front running board of the Presidential follow-up car, LJ030-0224|heard noises that sounded like firecrackers and ran toward the President's limousine.|heard noises that sounded like firecrackers and ran toward the President's limousine. LJ030-0225|But he was immediately called back by Special Agent Emory P. Roberts, in charge of the follow-up car,|But he was immediately called back by Special Agent Emory P. Roberts, in charge of the follow-up car, LJ030-0226|who did not believe that he could reach, the President's car at the speed it was then traveling.|who did not believe that he could reach, the President's car at the speed it was then traveling. LJ030-0227|Special Agent George W. Hickey, Jr., in the rear seat of the Presidential follow-up car,|Special Agent George W. Hickey, Jr., in the rear seat of the Presidential follow-up car, LJ030-0228|picked up and cocked an automatic rifle as he heard the last shot.|picked up and cocked an automatic rifle as he heard the last shot. LJ030-0229|At this point the cars were speeding through the underpass and had left the scene of the shooting,|At this point the cars were speeding through the underpass and had left the scene of the shooting, LJ030-0230|but Hickey kept the automatic weapon ready as the car raced to the hospital.|but Hickey kept the automatic weapon ready as the car raced to the hospital. LJ030-0231|Most of the other Secret Service agents in the motorcade had drawn their sidearms.|Most of the other Secret Service agents in the motorcade had drawn their sidearms. LJ030-0232|Roberts noticed that the Vice President's car was approximately one-half block|Roberts noticed that the Vice President's car was approximately one-half block LJ030-0233|behind the Presidential follow-up car at the time of the shooting and signaled for it to move in closer.|behind the Presidential follow-up car at the time of the shooting and signaled for it to move in closer. LJ030-0234|Directing the security detail for the Vice President from the right front seat of the Vice-Presidential car, Special Agent Youngblood recalled, quote,|Directing the security detail for the Vice President from the right front seat of the Vice-Presidential car, Special Agent Youngblood recalled, quote, LJ030-0235|As we were beginning to go down this incline, all of a sudden there was an explosive noise.|As we were beginning to go down this incline, all of a sudden there was an explosive noise. LJ030-0236|I quickly observed unnatural movement of crowds, like ducking or scattering, and quick movements in the Presidential follow-up car.|I quickly observed unnatural movement of crowds, like ducking or scattering, and quick movements in the Presidential follow-up car. LJ030-0237|So I turned around and hit the Vice President on the shoulder and hollered, get down,|So I turned around and hit the Vice President on the shoulder and hollered, get down, LJ030-0238|and then looked around again and saw more of this movement, and so I proceeded to go to the back seat and get on top of him.|and then looked around again and saw more of this movement, and so I proceeded to go to the back seat and get on top of him. LJ030-0239|Youngblood was not positive that he was in the rear seat before the second shot, but thought it probable because of President Johnson's statement|Youngblood was not positive that he was in the rear seat before the second shot, but thought it probable because of President Johnson's statement LJ030-0240|to that effect immediately after the assassination.|to that effect immediately after the assassination. LJ030-0241|President Johnson emphasized Youngblood's instantaneous reaction after the first shot:|President Johnson emphasized Youngblood's instantaneous reaction after the first shot: LJ030-0242|I was startled by the sharp report or explosion,|I was startled by the sharp report or explosion, LJ030-0243|but I had no time to speculate as to its origin because Agent Youngblood turned in a flash, immediately after the first explosion,|but I had no time to speculate as to its origin because Agent Youngblood turned in a flash, immediately after the first explosion, LJ030-0244|hitting me on the shoulder, and shouted to all of us in the back seat to get down.|hitting me on the shoulder, and shouted to all of us in the back seat to get down. LJ030-0245|I was pushed down by Agent Youngblood.|I was pushed down by Agent Youngblood. LJ030-0246|Almost in the same moment in which he hit or pushed me, he vaulted over the back seat and sat on me.|Almost in the same moment in which he hit or pushed me, he vaulted over the back seat and sat on me. LJ030-0247|I was bent over under the weight of Agent Youngblood's body, toward Mrs. Johnson and Senator Yarborough, end quote,|I was bent over under the weight of Agent Youngblood's body, toward Mrs. Johnson and Senator Yarborough, end quote, LJ030-0248|Clifton C. Carter, riding in the Vice President's follow-up car a short distance behind,|Clifton C. Carter, riding in the Vice President's follow-up car a short distance behind, LJ030-0249|reported that Youngblood was in the rear seat using his body to shield the Vice President before the second and third shots were fired.|reported that Youngblood was in the rear seat using his body to shield the Vice President before the second and third shots were fired. LJ030-0250|Other Secret Service agents assigned to the motorcade remained at their posts during the race to the hospital.|Other Secret Service agents assigned to the motorcade remained at their posts during the race to the hospital. LJ030-0251|None stayed at the scene of the shooting, and none entered the Texas School Book Depository Building at or immediately after the shooting.|None stayed at the scene of the shooting, and none entered the Texas School Book Depository Building at or immediately after the shooting. LJ030-0252|Secret Service procedure requires that each agent stay with the person being protected|Secret Service procedure requires that each agent stay with the person being protected LJ030-0253|and not be diverted unless it is necessary to accomplish the protective assignment.|and not be diverted unless it is necessary to accomplish the protective assignment. LJ030-0254|Forrest V. Sorrels, special agent in charge of the Dallas office, was the first Secret Service agent to return to the scene of the assassination,|Forrest V. Sorrels, special agent in charge of the Dallas office, was the first Secret Service agent to return to the scene of the assassination, LJ030-0255|approximately 20 or 25 minutes after the shots were fired.|approximately twenty or twenty-five minutes after the shots were fired. LJ031-0001|Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.|Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. LJ031-0002|The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 3.|The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter two. The Assassination: Part three. LJ031-0003|Parkland Memorial Hospital. The Race to the Hospital|Parkland Memorial Hospital. The Race to the Hospital LJ031-0004|In the final instant of the assassination, the Presidential motorcade began a race to Parkland Memorial Hospital,|In the final instant of the assassination, the Presidential motorcade began a race to Parkland Memorial Hospital, LJ031-0005|approximately 4 miles from the Texas School Book Depository Building.|approximately four miles from the Texas School Book Depository Building. LJ031-0006|On receipt of the radio message from Kellerman to the lead car that the President had been hit,|On receipt of the radio message from Kellerman to the lead car that the President had been hit, LJ031-0007|Chief of Police Curry and police motorcyclists at the head of the motorcade led the way to the hospital.|Chief of Police Curry and police motorcyclists at the head of the motorcade led the way to the hospital. LJ031-0008|Meanwhile, Chief Curry ordered the police base station to notify Parkland Hospital that the wounded President was en route.|Meanwhile, Chief Curry ordered the police base station to notify Parkland Hospital that the wounded President was en route. LJ031-0009|The radio log of the Dallas Police Department shows that at 12:30 p.m. on November 22|The radio log of the Dallas Police Department shows that at twelve:thirty p.m. on November twenty-two LJ031-0010|Chief Curry radioed, quote, Go to the hospital -- Parkland Hospital. Have them stand by, end quote,|Chief Curry radioed, quote, Go to the hospital -- Parkland Hospital. Have them stand by, end quote, LJ031-0011|A moment later Curry added, quote, Looks like the President has been hit. Have Parkland stand by, end quote,|A moment later Curry added, quote, Looks like the President has been hit. Have Parkland stand by, end quote, LJ031-0012|The base station replied, quote, They have been notified, end quote,|The base station replied, quote, They have been notified, end quote, LJ031-0013|Traveling at speeds estimated at times to be up to 70 or 80 miles per hour down the Stemmons Freeway and Harry Hines Boulevard|Traveling at speeds estimated at times to be up to seventy or eighty miles per hour down the Stemmons Freeway and Harry Hines Boulevard LJ031-0014|the Presidential limousine arrived at the emergency entrance of the Parkland Hospital at about 12:35 p.m.|the Presidential limousine arrived at the emergency entrance of the Parkland Hospital at about twelve:thirty-five p.m. LJ031-0015|Arriving almost simultaneously were the President's follow-up car, the Vice President's automobile, and the Vice President's follow-up car.|Arriving almost simultaneously were the President's follow-up car, the Vice President's automobile, and the Vice President's follow-up car. LJ031-0016|Admiral Burkley, the President's physician, arrived at the hospital, quote, between 3 and 5 minutes following the arrival of the President, end quote.|Admiral Burkley, the President's physician, arrived at the hospital, quote, between three and five minutes following the arrival of the President, end quote. LJ031-0017|since the riders in his car, quote, were not exactly aware what had happened, end quote, and the car went on to the Trade Mart first.|since the riders in his car, quote, were not exactly aware what had happened, end quote, and the car went on to the Trade Mart first. LJ031-0018|When Parkland Hospital received the notification, the staff in the emergency area was alerted and trauma rooms 1 and 2 were prepared.|When Parkland Hospital received the notification, the staff in the emergency area was alerted and trauma rooms one and two were prepared. LJ031-0019|These rooms were for the emergency treatment of acutely ill or injured patients. Although the first message mentioned an injury only to President Kennedy,|These rooms were for the emergency treatment of acutely ill or injured patients. Although the first message mentioned an injury only to President Kennedy, LJ031-0020|two rooms were prepared.|two rooms were prepared. LJ031-0021|As the President's limousine sped toward the hospital, 12 doctors to the emergency area: surgeons, Drs. Malcolm O. Perry,|As the President's limousine sped toward the hospital, twelve doctors to the emergency area: surgeons, Drs. Malcolm O. Perry, LJ031-0022|Charles R. Baxter, Robert N. McClelland, Ronald C. Jones; the chief neurologist, Dr. William Kemp Clark;|Charles R. Baxter, Robert N. McClelland, Ronald C. Jones; the chief neurologist, Dr. William Kemp Clark; LJ031-0023|4 anesthesiologists, Drs. Marion T. Jenkins, Adolph H. Giesecke, Jr., Jackie H. Hunt,|four anesthesiologists, Drs. Marion T. Jenkins, Adolph H. Giesecke, Jr., Jackie H. Hunt, LJ031-0024|Gene C. Akin;|Gene C. Akin; LJ031-0025|urological surgeon, Dr Paul C. Peters; an oral surgeon, Dr. Don T. Curtis; and a heart specialist,|urological surgeon, Dr Paul C. Peters; an oral surgeon, Dr. Don T. Curtis; and a heart specialist, LJ031-0026|Dr. Fouad A. Bashour.|Dr. Fouad A. Bashour. LJ031-0027|Upon arriving at Parkland Hospital,|Upon arriving at Parkland Hospital, LJ031-0028|Lawson jumped from the lead car and rushed into the emergency entrance, where he was met by hospital staff members wheeling stretchers out to the automobile.|Lawson jumped from the lead car and rushed into the emergency entrance, where he was met by hospital staff members wheeling stretchers out to the automobile. LJ031-0029|Special Agent Hill removed his suit jacket and covered the President's head and upper chest to prevent the taking of photographs.|Special Agent Hill removed his suit jacket and covered the President's head and upper chest to prevent the taking of photographs. LJ031-0030|Governor Connally, who had lost consciousness on the ride to the hospital, regained consciousness when the limousine stopped abruptly at the emergency entrance.|Governor Connally, who had lost consciousness on the ride to the hospital, regained consciousness when the limousine stopped abruptly at the emergency entrance. LJ031-0031|Despite his serious wounds, Governor Connally tried to get out of the way so that medical help could reach the President.|Despite his serious wounds, Governor Connally tried to get out of the way so that medical help could reach the President. LJ031-0032|Although he was reclining in his wife's arms, he lurched forward in an effort to stand upright and get out of the car, but he collapsed again.|Although he was reclining in his wife's arms, he lurched forward in an effort to stand upright and get out of the car, but he collapsed again. LJ031-0033|Then he experienced his first sensation of pain, which became excruciating.|Then he experienced his first sensation of pain, which became excruciating. LJ031-0034|The Governor was lifted onto a stretcher and taken into trauma room 2.|The Governor was lifted onto a stretcher and taken into trauma room two. LJ031-0035|For a moment, Mrs. Kennedy refused to release the President, whom she held in her lap,|For a moment, Mrs. Kennedy refused to release the President, whom she held in her lap, LJ031-0036|but then Kellerman, Greer, and Lawson lifted the President onto a stretcher and pushed it into trauma room 1.|but then Kellerman, Greer, and Lawson lifted the President onto a stretcher and pushed it into trauma room one. LJ031-0037|Treatment of President Kennedy|Treatment of President Kennedy LJ031-0038|The first physician to see the President at Parkland Hospital was Dr. Charles J. Carrico, a resident in general surgery.|The first physician to see the President at Parkland Hospital was Dr. Charles J. Carrico, a resident in general surgery. LJ031-0039|Dr. Carrico was in the emergency area, examining another patient, when he was notified that President Kennedy was en route to the hospital.|Dr. Carrico was in the emergency area, examining another patient, when he was notified that President Kennedy was en route to the hospital. LJ031-0040|Approximately 2 minutes later, Dr. Carrico saw the President on his back, being wheeled into the emergency area.|Approximately two minutes later, Dr. Carrico saw the President on his back, being wheeled into the emergency area. LJ031-0041|He noted that the President was blue-white or ashen in color; had slow, spasmodic, agonal respiration without any coordination;|He noted that the President was blue-white or ashen in color; had slow, spasmodic, agonal respiration without any coordination; LJ031-0042|made no voluntary movements; had his eyes open with the pupils dilated without any reaction to light,|made no voluntary movements; had his eyes open with the pupils dilated without any reaction to light, LJ031-0043|evidenced no palpable pulse; and had a few chest sounds which were thought to be heartbeats.|evidenced no palpable pulse; and had a few chest sounds which were thought to be heartbeats. LJ031-0044|On the basis of these findings, Dr. Carrico concluded that President Kennedy was still alive.|On the basis of these findings, Dr. Carrico concluded that President Kennedy was still alive. LJ031-0045|Dr. Carrico noted two wounds: a small bullet wound in the front lower neck,|Dr. Carrico noted two wounds: a small bullet wound in the front lower neck, LJ031-0046|and an extensive wound in the President's head where a sizable portion of the skull was missing.|and an extensive wound in the President's head where a sizable portion of the skull was missing. LJ031-0047|He observed shredded brain tissue and, quote, considerable slow oozing, end quote, from the latter wound,|He observed shredded brain tissue and, quote, considerable slow oozing, end quote, from the latter wound, LJ031-0048|followed by, quote, more profuse bleeding, end quote, after some circulation was established.|followed by, quote, more profuse bleeding, end quote, after some circulation was established. LJ031-0049|Dr. Carrico felt the President's back and determined that there was no large wound there which would be an immediate threat to life.|Dr. Carrico felt the President's back and determined that there was no large wound there which would be an immediate threat to life. LJ031-0050|Observing the serious problems presented by the head wound and inadequate respiration, Dr. Carrico directed his attention to improving the President's breathing.|Observing the serious problems presented by the head wound and inadequate respiration, Dr. Carrico directed his attention to improving the President's breathing. LJ031-0051|He noted contusions, hematoma to the right of the larynx, which was deviated slightly to the left,|He noted contusions, hematoma to the right of the larynx, which was deviated slightly to the left, LJ031-0052|and also ragged tissue which indicated a tracheal injury.|and also ragged tissue which indicated a tracheal injury. LJ031-0053|Dr. Carrico inserted a cuffed endotracheal tube past the injury, inflated the cuff, and connected it to a Bennett machine to assist in respiration.|Dr. Carrico inserted a cuffed endotracheal tube past the injury, inflated the cuff, and connected it to a Bennett machine to assist in respiration. LJ031-0054|At that point, direction of the President's treatment was undertaken by Dr. Malcolm O. Perry, who arrived at trauma room 1 a few moments after the President.|At that point, direction of the President's treatment was undertaken by Dr. Malcolm O. Perry, who arrived at trauma room one a few moments after the President. LJ031-0055|Dr. Perry noted the President's back brace as he felt for a femoral pulse, which he did not find.|Dr. Perry noted the President's back brace as he felt for a femoral pulse, which he did not find. LJ031-0056|Observing that an effective airway had to be established if treatment was to be effective, Dr. Perry performed a tracheotomy, which required 3 to 5 minutes.|Observing that an effective airway had to be established if treatment was to be effective, Dr. Perry performed a tracheotomy, which required three to five minutes. LJ031-0057|While Dr. Perry was performing the tracheotomy, Drs. Carrico and Ronald Jones made cutdowns on the President's right leg and left arm, respectively,|While Dr. Perry was performing the tracheotomy, Drs. Carrico and Ronald Jones made cutdowns on the President's right leg and left arm, respectively, LJ031-0058|to infuse blood and fluids into the circulatory system.|to infuse blood and fluids into the circulatory system. LJ031-0059|Dr. Carrico treated the President's known ad-renal insufficiency by administering hydrocortisone.|Dr. Carrico treated the President's known ad-renal insufficiency by administering hydrocortisone. LJ031-0060|Dr. Robert N. McClelland entered at that point and assisted Dr. Perry with the tracheotomy.|Dr. Robert N. McClelland entered at that point and assisted Dr. Perry with the tracheotomy. LJ031-0061|Dr. Fouad Bashour, chief of cardiology, Dr. M. T. Jenkins, chief of anesthesiology, and Dr. A. H. Giesecke, Jr.,|Dr. Fouad Bashour, chief of cardiology, Dr. M. T. Jenkins, chief of anesthesiology, and Dr. A. H. Giesecke, Jr., LJ031-0062|then joined in the effort to revive the President.|then joined in the effort to revive the President. LJ031-0063|When Dr. Perry noted free air and blood in the President's chest cavity, he asked that chest tubes be inserted to allow for drainage of blood and air.|When Dr. Perry noted free air and blood in the President's chest cavity, he asked that chest tubes be inserted to allow for drainage of blood and air. LJ031-0064|Drs. Paul C. Peters and Charles R. Baxter initiated these procedures.|Drs. Paul C. Peters and Charles R. Baxter initiated these procedures. LJ031-0065|As a result of the infusion of liquids through the cutdowns, the cardiac massage, and the airway,|As a result of the infusion of liquids through the cutdowns, the cardiac massage, and the airway, LJ031-0066|the doctors were able to maintain peripheral circulation as monitored at the neck (carotid) artery and at the wrist (radial) pulse.|the doctors were able to maintain peripheral circulation as monitored at the neck (carotid) artery and at the wrist (radial) pulse. LJ031-0067|A femoral pulse was also detected in the President's leg.|A femoral pulse was also detected in the President's leg. LJ031-0068|While these medical efforts were in progress,|While these medical efforts were in progress, LJ031-0069|Dr. Clark noted some electrical activity on the cardiotachyscope attached to monitor the President's heart responses.|Dr. Clark noted some electrical activity on the cardiotachyscope attached to monitor the President's heart responses. LJ031-0070|Dr. Clark, who most closely observed the head wound,|Dr. Clark, who most closely observed the head wound, LJ031-0071|described a large, gaping wound in the right rear part of the head, with substantial damage and exposure of brain tissue, and a considerable loss of blood.|described a large, gaping wound in the right rear part of the head, with substantial damage and exposure of brain tissue, and a considerable loss of blood. LJ031-0072|Dr. Clark did not see any other hole or wound on the President's head.|Dr. Clark did not see any other hole or wound on the President's head. LJ031-0073|According to Dr. Clark, the small bullet hole on the right rear of the President's head discovered during the subsequent autopsy|According to Dr. Clark, the small bullet hole on the right rear of the President's head discovered during the subsequent autopsy LJ031-0074|quote, could have easily been hidden in the blood and hair, end quote,|quote, could have easily been hidden in the blood and hair, end quote, LJ031-0075|In the absence of any neurological, muscular, or heart response, the doctors concluded that efforts to revive the President were hopeless.|In the absence of any neurological, muscular, or heart response, the doctors concluded that efforts to revive the President were hopeless. LJ031-0076|This was verified by Admiral Burkley, the President's physician, who arrived at the hospital after emergency treatment was underway and concluded that, quote,|This was verified by Admiral Burkley, the President's physician, who arrived at the hospital after emergency treatment was underway and concluded that, quote, LJ031-0077|my direct services to him at that moment would have interfered with the action of the team which was in progress, end quote,|my direct services to him at that moment would have interfered with the action of the team which was in progress, end quote, LJ031-0078|At approximately 1 p.m., after last rites were administered to the President by Father Oscar L. Huber, Dr. Clark pronounced the President dead.|At approximately one p.m., after last rites were administered to the President by Father Oscar L. Huber, Dr. Clark pronounced the President dead. LJ031-0079|He made the official determination because the ultimate cause of death, the severe head injury, was within his sphere of specialization.|He made the official determination because the ultimate cause of death, the severe head injury, was within his sphere of specialization. LJ031-0080|The time was fixed at 1 p.m., as an approximation, since it was impossible to determine the precise moment when life left the President.|The time was fixed at one p.m., as an approximation, since it was impossible to determine the precise moment when life left the President. LJ031-0081|President Kennedy could have survived the neck injury, but the head wound was fatal.|President Kennedy could have survived the neck injury, but the head wound was fatal. LJ031-0082|From a medical viewpoint, President Kennedy was alive when he arrived at Parkland Hospital;|From a medical viewpoint, President Kennedy was alive when he arrived at Parkland Hospital; LJ031-0083|the doctors observed that he had a heartbeat and was making some respiratory efforts.|the doctors observed that he had a heartbeat and was making some respiratory efforts. LJ031-0084|But his condition was hopeless, and the extraordinary efforts of the doctors to save him could not help but to have been unavailing.|But his condition was hopeless, and the extraordinary efforts of the doctors to save him could not help but to have been unavailing. LJ031-0085|Since the Dallas doctors directed all their efforts to controlling the massive bleeding caused by the head wound, and to reconstructing an airway to his lungs,|Since the Dallas doctors directed all their efforts to controlling the massive bleeding caused by the head wound, and to reconstructing an airway to his lungs, LJ031-0086|the President remained on his back throughout his medical treatment at Parkland.|the President remained on his back throughout his medical treatment at Parkland. LJ031-0087|When asked why he did not turn the President over, Dr. Carrico testified as follows:|When asked why he did not turn the President over, Dr. Carrico testified as follows: LJ031-0088|This man was in obvious extreme distress and any more thorough inspection would have involved several minutes -- well, several|This man was in obvious extreme distress and any more thorough inspection would have involved several minutes -- well, several LJ031-0089|considerable time which at this juncture was not available.|considerable time which at this juncture was not available. LJ031-0090|A thorough inspection would have involved washing and cleansing the back, and this is not practical in treating an acutely injured patient.|A thorough inspection would have involved washing and cleansing the back, and this is not practical in treating an acutely injured patient. LJ031-0091|You have to determine which things, which are immediately life threatening and cope with them, before attempting to evaluate the full extent of the injuries.|You have to determine which things, which are immediately life threatening and cope with them, before attempting to evaluate the full extent of the injuries. LJ031-0092|Did you ever have occasion to look at the President's back?|Did you ever have occasion to look at the President's back? LJ031-0093|Answer: No, sir. Before -- well, in trying to treat an acutely injured patient, you have to establish an airway, adequate ventilation|Answer: No, sir. Before -- well, in trying to treat an acutely injured patient, you have to establish an airway, adequate ventilation LJ031-0094|and you have to establish adequate circulation.|and you have to establish adequate circulation. LJ031-0095|Before this was accomplished the President's cardiac activity had ceased and closed cardiac massage was instituted, which made it impossible to inspect his back.|Before this was accomplished the President's cardiac activity had ceased and closed cardiac massage was instituted, which made it impossible to inspect his back. LJ031-0096|Question: Was any effort made to inspect the President's back after he had expired? Answer: No, sir.|Question: Was any effort made to inspect the President's back after he had expired? Answer: No, sir. LJ031-0097|Question: And why was no effort made at that time to inspect his back? Answer:|Question: And why was no effort made at that time to inspect his back? Answer: LJ031-0098|I suppose nobody really had the heart to do it.|I suppose nobody really had the heart to do it. LJ031-0099|Moreover, the Parkland doctors took no further action after the President had expired because they concluded that it was beyond the scope of their permissible duties.|Moreover, the Parkland doctors took no further action after the President had expired because they concluded that it was beyond the scope of their permissible duties. LJ031-0100|Treatment of Governor Connally|Treatment of Governor Connally LJ031-0101|While one medical team tried to revive President Kennedy, a second performed a series of operations on the bullet wounds sustained by Governor Connally.|While one medical team tried to revive President Kennedy, a second performed a series of operations on the bullet wounds sustained by Governor Connally. LJ031-0102|Governor Connally was originally seen by Dr. Carrico and Dr. Richard Dulany.|Governor Connally was originally seen by Dr. Carrico and Dr. Richard Dulany. LJ031-0103|While Dr. Carrico went on to attend the President, Dr. Dulany stayed with the Governor and was soon joined by several other doctors.|While Dr. Carrico went on to attend the President, Dr. Dulany stayed with the Governor and was soon joined by several other doctors. LJ031-0104|At approximately 12:45 p.m., Dr. Robert Shaw,|At approximately twelve:forty-five p.m., Dr. Robert Shaw, LJ031-0105|chief of thoracic surgery, arrived at trauma room 2, to take charge of the care of Governor Connally,|chief of thoracic surgery, arrived at trauma room two, to take charge of the care of Governor Connally, LJ031-0106|whose major wound fell within Dr. Shaw's area of specialization.|whose major wound fell within Dr. Shaw's area of specialization. LJ031-0107|Governor Connally had a large sucking wound in the front of the right chest which caused extreme pain and difficulty in breathing.|Governor Connally had a large sucking wound in the front of the right chest which caused extreme pain and difficulty in breathing. LJ031-0108|Rubber tubes were inserted between the second and third ribs to reexpand the right lung, which had collapsed because of the opening in the chest wall.|Rubber tubes were inserted between the second and third ribs to reexpand the right lung, which had collapsed because of the opening in the chest wall. LJ031-0109|At 1:35 p.m., after Governor Connally had been moved to the operating room, Dr. Shaw started the first operation|At one:thirty-five p.m., after Governor Connally had been moved to the operating room, Dr. Shaw started the first operation LJ031-0110|by cutting away the edges of the wound on the front of the Governor's chest and suturing the damaged lung and lacerated muscles.|by cutting away the edges of the wound on the front of the Governor's chest and suturing the damaged lung and lacerated muscles. LJ031-0111|The elliptical wound in the Governor's back, located slightly to the left of the Governor's right armpit approximately five-eighths inch (a centimeter and a half)|The elliptical wound in the Governor's back, located slightly to the left of the Governor's right armpit approximately five-eighths inch (a centimeter and a half) LJ031-0112|in its greatest diameter, was treated by cutting away the damaged skin and suturing the back muscle and skin.|in its greatest diameter, was treated by cutting away the damaged skin and suturing the back muscle and skin. LJ031-0113|This operation was concluded at 3:20 p.m.|This operation was concluded at three:twenty p.m. LJ031-0114|Two additional operations were performed on Governor Connally for wounds which he had not realized he had sustained until he regained consciousness the following day.|Two additional operations were performed on Governor Connally for wounds which he had not realized he had sustained until he regained consciousness the following day. LJ031-0115|From approximately 4 p.m. to 4:50 p.m. on November 22,|From approximately four p.m. to four:fifty p.m. on November twenty-two, LJ031-0116|Dr. Charles F. Gregory, chief of orthopedic surgery, operated on the wounds of Governor Connally's right wrist,|Dr. Charles F. Gregory, chief of orthopedic surgery, operated on the wounds of Governor Connally's right wrist, LJ031-0117|assisted by Drs. William Osborne and John Parker.|assisted by Drs. William Osborne and John Parker. LJ031-0118|The wound on the back of the wrist was left partially open for draining, and the wound on the palm side was enlarged, cleansed, and closed.|The wound on the back of the wrist was left partially open for draining, and the wound on the palm side was enlarged, cleansed, and closed. LJ031-0119|The fracture was set, and a cast was applied with some traction utilized.|The fracture was set, and a cast was applied with some traction utilized. LJ031-0120|While the second operation was in progress,|While the second operation was in progress, LJ031-0121|Dr. George T. Shires, assisted by Drs. Robert McClelland, Charles Baxter, and Ralph Don Patman,|Dr. George T. Shires, assisted by Drs. Robert McClelland, Charles Baxter, and Ralph Don Patman, LJ031-0122|treated the gunshot wound in the left thigh.|treated the gunshot wound in the left thigh. LJ031-0123|This punctuate missile wound, about two-fifths inch in diameter (1 centimeter) and located approximately 5 inches above the left knee,|This punctuate missile wound, about two-fifths inch in diameter (one centimeter) and located approximately five inches above the left knee, LJ031-0124|was cleansed and closed with sutures; but a small metallic fragment remained in the Governor's leg.|was cleansed and closed with sutures; but a small metallic fragment remained in the Governor's leg. LJ031-0125|Vice President Johnson at Parkland|Vice President Johnson at Parkland LJ031-0126|As President Kennedy and Governor Connally were being removed from the limousine onto stretchers,|As President Kennedy and Governor Connally were being removed from the limousine onto stretchers, LJ031-0127|a protective circle of Secret Service agents surrounded Vice President and Mrs. Johnson|a protective circle of Secret Service agents surrounded Vice President and Mrs. Johnson LJ031-0128|and escorted them into Parkland Hospital through the emergency entrance.|and escorted them into Parkland Hospital through the emergency entrance. LJ031-0129|The agents moved a nurse and patient out of a nearby room, lowered the shades, and took emergency security measures to protect the Vice President.|The agents moved a nurse and patient out of a nearby room, lowered the shades, and took emergency security measures to protect the Vice President. LJ031-0130|Two men from the President's follow-up car were detailed to help protect the Vice President.|Two men from the President's follow-up car were detailed to help protect the Vice President. LJ031-0131|An agent was stationed at the entrance to stop anyone who was not a member of the Presidential party.|An agent was stationed at the entrance to stop anyone who was not a member of the Presidential party. LJ031-0132|U.S. Representatives Henry B. Gonzalez,|U.S. Representatives Henry B. Gonzalez, LJ031-0133|Jack Brooks, Homer Thornberry, and Albert Thomas joined Clifton C. Carter and the group of special agents protecting the Vice President.|Jack Brooks, Homer Thornberry, and Albert Thomas joined Clifton C. Carter and the group of special agents protecting the Vice President. LJ031-0134|On one occasion Mrs. Johnson, accompanied by two Secret Service agents, left the room to see Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Connally.|On one occasion Mrs. Johnson, accompanied by two Secret Service agents, left the room to see Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Connally. LJ031-0135|Concern that the Vice President might also be a target for assassination prompted the Secret Service agents to urge him to leave the hospital and return to Washington immediately.|Concern that the Vice President might also be a target for assassination prompted the Secret Service agents to urge him to leave the hospital and return to Washington immediately. LJ031-0136|The Vice President decided to wait until he received definitive word of the President's condition.|The Vice President decided to wait until he received definitive word of the President's condition. LJ031-0137|At approximately 1:20 p.m., Vice President Johnson was notified by O'Donnell that President Kennedy was dead.|At approximately one:twenty p.m., Vice President Johnson was notified by O'Donnell that President Kennedy was dead. LJ031-0138|Special Agent Youngblood learned from Mrs. Johnson the location of her two daughters|Special Agent Youngblood learned from Mrs. Johnson the location of her two daughters LJ031-0139|and made arrangements through Secret Service headquarters in Washington to provide them with protection immediately.|and made arrangements through Secret Service headquarters in Washington to provide them with protection immediately. LJ031-0140|When consulted by the Vice President, O'Donnell advised him to go to the airfield immediately and return to Washington.|When consulted by the Vice President, O'Donnell advised him to go to the airfield immediately and return to Washington. LJ031-0141|It was decided that the Vice President should return on the Presidential plane rather than on the Vice-Presidential plane because it had better communication equipment.|It was decided that the Vice President should return on the Presidential plane rather than on the Vice-Presidential plane because it had better communication equipment. LJ031-0142|The Vice President conferred with White House Assistant Press Secretary Malcolm Kilduff|The Vice President conferred with White House Assistant Press Secretary Malcolm Kilduff LJ031-0143|and decided that there would be no release of the news of the President's death until the Vice President had left the hospital.|and decided that there would be no release of the news of the President's death until the Vice President had left the hospital. LJ031-0144|When told that Mrs. Kennedy refused to leave without the President's body, the Vice President said that he would not leave Dallas without her.|When told that Mrs. Kennedy refused to leave without the President's body, the Vice President said that he would not leave Dallas without her. LJ031-0145|On the recommendation of the Secret Service agents, Vice President Johnson decided to board the Presidential airplane, Air Force One,|On the recommendation of the Secret Service agents, Vice President Johnson decided to board the Presidential airplane, Air Force One, LJ031-0146|and wait for Mrs. Kennedy and the President's body.|and wait for Mrs. Kennedy and the President's body. LJ031-0147|Secret Service Emergency Security Arrangements|Secret Service Emergency Security Arrangements LJ031-0148|Immediately after President Kennedy's stretcher was wheeled into trauma room 1, Secret Service agents took positions at the door of the small emergency room.|Immediately after President Kennedy's stretcher was wheeled into trauma room one, Secret Service agents took positions at the door of the small emergency room. LJ031-0149|A nurse was asked to identify hospital personnel and to tell everyone, except necessary medical staff members, to leave the emergency room.|A nurse was asked to identify hospital personnel and to tell everyone, except necessary medical staff members, to leave the emergency room. LJ031-0150|Other Secret Service agents posted themselves in the corridors and other areas near the emergency room.|Other Secret Service agents posted themselves in the corridors and other areas near the emergency room. LJ031-0151|Special Agent Lawson made certain that the Dallas police kept the public and press away from the immediate area of the hospital.|Special Agent Lawson made certain that the Dallas police kept the public and press away from the immediate area of the hospital. LJ031-0152|Agents Kellerman and Hill telephoned the head of the White House detail, Gerald A. Behn, to advise him of the assassination.|Agents Kellerman and Hill telephoned the head of the White House detail, Gerald A. Behn, to advise him of the assassination. LJ031-0153|The telephone line to Washington was kept open throughout the remainder of the stay at the hospital.|The telephone line to Washington was kept open throughout the remainder of the stay at the hospital. LJ031-0154|Secret Service agents stationed at later stops on the President's itinerary of November 22 were redeployed.|Secret Service agents stationed at later stops on the President's itinerary of November twenty-two were redeployed. LJ031-0155|Men at the Trade Mart were driven to Parkland Hospital in Dallas police cars.|Men at the Trade Mart were driven to Parkland Hospital in Dallas police cars. LJ031-0156|The Secret Service group awaiting the President in Austin were instructed to return to Washington.|The Secret Service group awaiting the President in Austin were instructed to return to Washington. LJ031-0157|Meanwhile, the Secret Service agents in charge of security at Love Field started to make arrangements for departure.|Meanwhile, the Secret Service agents in charge of security at Love Field started to make arrangements for departure. LJ031-0158|As soon as one of the agents learned of the shooting, he asked the officer in charge of the police detail at the airport|As soon as one of the agents learned of the shooting, he asked the officer in charge of the police detail at the airport LJ031-0159|to institute strict security measures for the Presidential aircraft, the airport terminal, and the surrounding area.|to institute strict security measures for the Presidential aircraft, the airport terminal, and the surrounding area. LJ031-0160|The police were cautioned to prevent picture taking.|The police were cautioned to prevent picture taking. LJ031-0161|Secret Service agents working with police cleared the areas adjacent to the aircraft, including warehouses,|Secret Service agents working with police cleared the areas adjacent to the aircraft, including warehouses, LJ031-0162|other terminal buildings and the neighboring parking lots, of all people.|other terminal buildings and the neighboring parking lots, of all people. LJ031-0163|The agents decided not to shift the Presidential aircraft to the far side of the airport because the original landing area was secure|The agents decided not to shift the Presidential aircraft to the far side of the airport because the original landing area was secure LJ031-0164|and a move would require new measures.|and a move would require new measures. LJ031-0165|When security arrangements at the airport were complete, the Secret Service made the necessary arrangements for the Vice President to leave the hospital.|When security arrangements at the airport were complete, the Secret Service made the necessary arrangements for the Vice President to leave the hospital. LJ031-0166|Unmarked police cars took the Vice President and Mrs. Johnson from Parkland Hospital to Love Field.|Unmarked police cars took the Vice President and Mrs. Johnson from Parkland Hospital to Love Field. LJ031-0167|Chief Curry drove one automobile occupied by Vice President Johnson, U.S. Representatives Thomas and Thornberry, and Special Agent Youngblood.|Chief Curry drove one automobile occupied by Vice President Johnson, U.S. Representatives Thomas and Thornberry, and Special Agent Youngblood. LJ031-0168|In another car Mrs. Johnson was driven to the airport accompanied by Secret Service agents and Representative Brooks.|In another car Mrs. Johnson was driven to the airport accompanied by Secret Service agents and Representative Brooks. LJ031-0169|Motorcade policemen who escorted the automobiles were requested by the Vice President and Agent Youngblood not to use sirens.|Motorcade policemen who escorted the automobiles were requested by the Vice President and Agent Youngblood not to use sirens. LJ031-0170|During the drive Vice President Johnson, at Youngblood's instruction, kept below window level.|During the drive Vice President Johnson, at Youngblood's instruction, kept below window level. LJ031-0171|Removal of the President's Body|Removal of the President's Body LJ031-0172|While the team of doctors at Parkland Hospital tried desperately to save the life of President Kennedy,|While the team of doctors at Parkland Hospital tried desperately to save the life of President Kennedy, LJ031-0173|Mrs. Kennedy alternated between watching them and waiting outside.|Mrs. Kennedy alternated between watching them and waiting outside. LJ031-0174|After the President was pronounced dead,|After the President was pronounced dead, LJ031-0175|O'Donnell tried to persuade Mrs. Kennedy to leave the area, but she refused.|O'Donnell tried to persuade Mrs. Kennedy to leave the area, but she refused. LJ031-0176|A casket was obtained and the President's body was prepared for removal.|A casket was obtained and the President's body was prepared for removal. LJ031-0177|Before the body could be taken from the hospital,|Before the body could be taken from the hospital, LJ031-0178|two Dallas officials informed members of the President's start that the body could not be removed from the city until an autopsy was performed.|two Dallas officials informed members of the President's start that the body could not be removed from the city until an autopsy was performed. LJ031-0179|Despite the protests of these officials, the casket was wheeled out of the hospital, placed in an ambulance, and transported to the airport shortly after 2 p.m.|Despite the protests of these officials, the casket was wheeled out of the hospital, placed in an ambulance, and transported to the airport shortly after two p.m. LJ031-0180|At approximately 2:15 p.m. the casket was loaded, with some difficulty because of the narrow airplane door,|At approximately two:fifteen p.m. the casket was loaded, with some difficulty because of the narrow airplane door, LJ031-0181|onto the rear of the Presidential plane where seats had been removed to make room.|onto the rear of the Presidential plane where seats had been removed to make room. LJ031-0182|Concerned that the local officials might try to prevent the plane's departure, O'Donnell asked that the pilot take off immediately.|Concerned that the local officials might try to prevent the plane's departure, O'Donnell asked that the pilot take off immediately. LJ031-0183|He was informed that takeoff would be delayed until Vice President Johnson was sworn in.|He was informed that takeoff would be delayed until Vice President Johnson was sworn in. LJ031-0184|Swearing in of the New President|Swearing in of the New President LJ031-0185|From the Presidential airplane, the Vice President telephoned Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy,|From the Presidential airplane, the Vice President telephoned Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, LJ031-0186|who advised that Mr. Johnson take the Presidential oath of office before the plane left Dallas.|who advised that Mr. Johnson take the Presidential oath of office before the plane left Dallas. LJ031-0187|Federal Judge Sarah T. Hughes hastened to the plane to administer the oath.|Federal Judge Sarah T. Hughes hastened to the plane to administer the oath. LJ031-0188|Members of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential parties filled the central compartment of the plane to witness the swearing in.|Members of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential parties filled the central compartment of the plane to witness the swearing in. LJ031-0189|At 2:38 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, Lyndon Baines Johnson took the oath of office as the 36th President of the United States.|At two:thirty-eight p.m., Eastern Standard Time, Lyndon Baines Johnson took the oath of office as the thirty-sixth President of the United States. LJ031-0190|Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Johnson stood at the side of the new President as he took the oath of office.|Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Johnson stood at the side of the new President as he took the oath of office. LJ031-0191|Nine minutes later, the Presidential airplane departed for Washington, D.C.|Nine minutes later, the Presidential airplane departed for Washington, D.C. LJ031-0192|Return to Washington, D.C.|Return to Washington, D.C. LJ031-0193|On the return flight, Mrs. Kennedy sat with David Powers, Kenneth O'Donnell, and Lawrence O'Brien.|On the return flight, Mrs. Kennedy sat with David Powers, Kenneth O'Donnell, and Lawrence O'Brien. LJ031-0194|At 5:58 p.m. Eastern Standard Time,|At five:fifty-eight p.m. Eastern Standard Time, LJ031-0195|Air Force One landed at Andrews Air Force Base, where President Kennedy had begun his last trip only 31 hours before.|Air Force One landed at Andrews Air Force Base, where President Kennedy had begun his last trip only thirty-one hours before. LJ031-0196|Detailed security arrangements had been made by radio from the President's plane on the return flight.|Detailed security arrangements had been made by radio from the President's plane on the return flight. LJ031-0197|The public had been excluded from the base, and only Government officials and the press were permitted near the landing area.|The public had been excluded from the base, and only Government officials and the press were permitted near the landing area. LJ031-0198|Upon arrival, President Johnson made a brief statement over television and radio.|Upon arrival, President Johnson made a brief statement over television and radio. LJ031-0199|President and Mrs. Johnson were flown by helicopter to the White House, from where Mrs. Johnson was driven to her residence under Secret Service escort.|President and Mrs. Johnson were flown by helicopter to the White House, from where Mrs. Johnson was driven to her residence under Secret Service escort. LJ031-0200|The President then walked to the Executive Office Building, where he worked until 9 p.m.|The President then walked to the Executive Office Building, where he worked until nine p.m. LJ031-0201|Given a choice between the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda, Maryland, and the Army's Walter Reed Hospital,|Given a choice between the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda, Maryland, and the Army's Walter Reed Hospital, LJ031-0202|Mrs. Kennedy chose the hospital in Bethesda for the autopsy because the President had served in the Navy.|Mrs. Kennedy chose the hospital in Bethesda for the autopsy because the President had served in the Navy. LJ031-0203|Mrs. Kennedy and the Attorney General,|Mrs. Kennedy and the Attorney General, LJ031-0204|with three Secret Service agents, accompanied President Kennedy's body on the 45-minute automobile trip from Andrews Air Force Base to the hospital.|with three Secret Service agents, accompanied President Kennedy's body on the forty-five-minute automobile trip from Andrews Air Force Base to the hospital. LJ031-0205|On the 17th floor of the Hospital, Mrs. Kennedy and the Attorney General joined other members of the Kennedy family to await the conclusion of the autopsy.|On the seventeenth floor of the Hospital, Mrs. Kennedy and the Attorney General joined other members of the Kennedy family to await the conclusion of the autopsy. LJ031-0206|Mrs. Kennedy was guarded by Secret Service agents in quarters assigned to her in the naval hospital.|Mrs. Kennedy was guarded by Secret Service agents in quarters assigned to her in the naval hospital. LJ031-0207|The Secret Service established a communication system with the White House and screened all telephone calls and visitors.|The Secret Service established a communication system with the White House and screened all telephone calls and visitors. LJ031-0208|The hospital received the President's body for autopsy at approximately 7:35 p.m.|The hospital received the President's body for autopsy at approximately seven:thirty-five p.m. LJ031-0209|X-rays and photographs were taken preliminarily and the pathological examination began at about 8 p.m.|X-rays and photographs were taken preliminarily and the pathological examination began at about eight p.m. LJ031-0210|The autopsy report noted that President Kennedy was 46 years of age, 72 and one half inches tall,|The autopsy report noted that President Kennedy was forty-six years of age, seventy-two and one half inches tall, LJ031-0211|weighed 170 pounds, had blue eyes and reddish-brown hair.|weighed one hundred seventy pounds, had blue eyes and reddish-brown hair. LJ031-0212|The body was muscular and well developed with no gross skeletal abnormalities except for those caused by the gunshot wounds.|The body was muscular and well developed with no gross skeletal abnormalities except for those caused by the gunshot wounds. LJ031-0213|Under "Pathological Diagnosis" the cause of death was set forth as "Gunshot wound, head.
The autopsy examination revealed two wounds in the President's head.
One wound, approximately one-fourth of an inch by five-eighths of an inch (6 by 15 millimeters),
was located about an inch (2.5 centimeters) to the right and slightly above the large bony protrusion
(external occipital protuberance) which juts out at the center of the lower part of the back of the skull.
The second head wound measured approximately 5 inches (13 centimeters) in its greatest diameter,
but it was difficult to measure accurately because multiple crisscross fractures radiated from the large defect.
During the autopsy examination, Federal agents brought the surgeons three pieces of bone recovered from Elm Street and the Presidential automobile.
When put together, these fragments accounted for approximately three-quarters of the missing portion of the skull.
The surgeons observed, through X-ray analysis, 30 or 40 tiny dustlike fragments of metal
running in a line from the wound in the rear of the President's head toward the front part of the skull,
with a sizable metal fragment lying just above the right eye.
From this head wound two small irregularly shaped fragments of metal were recovered and turned over to the FBI.
The autopsy also disclosed a wound near the base of the back of President Kennedy's neck slightly to the right of his spine.
The doctors traced the course of the bullet through the body and, as information was received from Parkland Hospital,
concluded that the bullet had emerged from the front portion of the President's neck that had been cut away by the tracheotomy at Parkland.
The nature and characteristics of this neck wound are discussed fully in the next chapter.
After the autopsy was concluded at approximately 11 p.m., the President's body was prepared for burial.
This was finished at approximately 4 a.m.
Shortly thereafter, the President's wife, family and aides left Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The President's body was taken to the East Room of the White House where it was placed under ceremonial military guard.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 1.
The preceding chapter has established that the bullets which killed President Kennedy and wounded Governor Connally
were fired from the southeast corner window of the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository Building
and that the weapon which fired these bullets was a Mannlicher-Carcano
6.5-millimeter Italian rifle bearing the serial number C2766.
In this chapter the Commission evaluates the evidence upon which it has based its conclusion concerning the identity of the assassin.
This evidence includes (1) the ownership and possession of the weapon used to commit the assassination,
(2) the means by which the weapon was brought into the Depository Building,
(3) the identity of the person present at the window from which the shots were fired,
(4) the killing of Dallas Patrolman J. D. Tippit within 45 minutes after the assassination, (5)
the resistance to arrest and the attempted shooting of another police officer by the man (Lee Harvey Oswald) subsequently accused of assassinating President Kennedy
and killing Patrolman Tippit,
(6) the lies told to the police by Oswald, (7)
the evidence linking Oswald to the attempted killing of Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker (Resigned, U.S. Army) on April 10, 1963,
and (8) Oswald's capability with a rifle.
Ownership And Possession Of Assassination Weapon
Purchase of Rifle by Oswald
Shortly after the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was found on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository Building, agents of the FBI
learned from retail outlets in Dallas that Crescent Firearms, Inc., of New York City,
was a distributor of surplus Italian 6.5-millimeter military rifles. During the evening of November 22, 1963,
a review of the records of Crescent Firearms revealed that the firm had shipped an Italian carbine, serial number C2766,
to Klein's Sporting Goods Co., of Chicago, Illinois.
After searching their records from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m.
the officers of Klein's discovered that a rifle bearing serial number C2766 had been shipped to one A. Hidell,
Post Office Box 2915, Dallas, Texas, on March 20, 1963.
According to its microfilm records, Klein's received an order for a rifle on March 13, 1963,
on a coupon clipped from the February 1963 issue of the American Rifleman magazine.
The order coupon was signed, in handprinting, "A. Hidell, P.O. Box 2915, Dallas, Texas."
It was sent in an envelope bearing the same name and return address in handwriting.
Document examiners for the Treasury Department and the FBI testified unequivocally
that the bold printing on the face of the mail-order coupon was in the handprinting of Lee Harvey Oswald and that the writing on the envelope was also his.
Oswald's writing on these and other documents was identified by comparing the writing and printing on the documents in question
with that appearing on documents known to have been written by Oswald, such as his letters, passport application, and endorsements of checks.
In addition to the order coupon the envelope contained a. U.S. postal money order for $21.45,
purchased as No. 2,202,130,462 in Dallas, Texas, on March 12, 1963.
The canceled money order was obtained from the Post Office Department.
Opposite the printed words "Pay To" were written the words "Kleins Sporting Goods,"
and opposite the printed word "From"
were written the words "A. Hidell, P.O. Box 2915 Dallas, Texas."
These words were also in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald.
From Klein's records it was possible to trace the processing of the order after its receipt.
A bank deposit made on March 13, 1963, included an item of $21.45. Klein's shipping order form
shows an imprint made by the cash register which recorded the receipt of $21.45 on March 13, 1963.
This price included $19.95 for the rifle and the scope, and $1.50 for postage and handling.
The rifle without the scope cost only $12.78.
According to the vice president of Klein's, William Waldman,
the scope was mounted on the rifle by a gunsmith employed by Klein's, and the rifle was shipped fully assembled in accordance with customary company procedures.
The specific rifle shipped against the order had been received by Klein's from Crescent on February 21, 1963.
It bore the manufacturer's serial number C2766.
On that date, Klein's placed an internal control number VC836 on this rifle.
According to Klein's shipping order form, one Italian carbine 6.5 x 4 x scope,
control number VC836, serial number C2766, was shipped parcel post to
A. Hidell, P.O. Box 2915, Dallas, Texas," on March 20, 1963.|"A. Hidell, P.O. Box two nine one five, Dallas, Texas," on March twenty, nineteen sixty-three. LJ032-0055|Information received from the Italian Armed Forces Intelligence Service has established that this particular rifle was the only rifle of its type|Information received from the Italian Armed Forces Intelligence Service has established that this particular rifle was the only rifle of its type LJ032-0056|bearing serial number C2766.|bearing serial number C two seven six six. LJ032-0057|The post office box to which the rifle was shipped was rented to "Lee H. Oswald" from October 9, 1962,|The post office box to which the rifle was shipped was rented to "Lee H. Oswald" from October nine, nineteen sixty-two, LJ032-0058|to May 14, 1963.|to May fourteen, nineteen sixty-three. LJ032-0059|Experts on handwriting identification from the Treasury Department and the FBI|Experts on handwriting identification from the Treasury Department and the FBI LJ032-0060|testified that the signature and other writing on the application for that box were in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald|testified that the signature and other writing on the application for that box were in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald LJ032-0061|as was a change-of-address card dated May 12, 1963,|as was a change-of-address card dated May twelve, nineteen sixty-three, LJ032-0062|by which Oswald requested that mail addressed to that box be forwarded to him in New Orleans, where he had moved on April 24.|by which Oswald requested that mail addressed to that box be forwarded to him in New Orleans, where he had moved on April twenty-four. LJ032-0063|Since the rifle was shipped from Chicago on March 20, 1963, it was received in Dallas during the period when Oswald rented and used the box.|Since the rifle was shipped from Chicago on March twenty, nineteen sixty-three, it was received in Dallas during the period when Oswald rented and used the box. LJ032-0064|It is not known whether the application for post office box 2915 listed "A. Hidell" as a person entitled to receive mail at this box.|It is not known whether the application for post office box two nine one five listed "A. Hidell" as a person entitled to receive mail at this box. LJ032-0065|In accordance with postal regulations, the portion of the application which lists names of persons, other than the applicant, entitled to receive mail|In accordance with postal regulations, the portion of the application which lists names of persons, other than the applicant, entitled to receive mail LJ032-0066|was thrown away after the box was closed in May 1963.|was thrown away after the box was closed in May nineteen sixty-three. LJ032-0067|Postal Inspector Harry D. Holmes of the Dallas Post Office testified, however, that when a package is received for a certain box,|Postal Inspector Harry D. Holmes of the Dallas Post Office testified, however, that when a package is received for a certain box, LJ032-0068|a notice is placed in that box regardless of whether the name on the package is listed on the application as a person entitled to receive mail through that box.|a notice is placed in that box regardless of whether the name on the package is listed on the application as a person entitled to receive mail through that box. LJ032-0069|The person having access to the box then takes the notice to the window and is given the package.|The person having access to the box then takes the notice to the window and is given the package. LJ032-0070|Ordinarily, Inspector Holmes testified, identification is not requested because it is assumed that the person with the notice is entitled to the package.|Ordinarily, Inspector Holmes testified, identification is not requested because it is assumed that the person with the notice is entitled to the package. LJ032-0071|Oswald's use of the name "Hidell" to purchase the assassination weapon was one of several instances in which he used this name as an alias.|Oswald's use of the name "Hidell" to purchase the assassination weapon was one of several instances in which he used this name as an alias. LJ032-0072|When arrested on the day of the assassination, he had in his possession a Smith & Wesson 38 caliber revolver|When arrested on the day of the assassination, he had in his possession a Smith and Wesson thirty-eight caliber revolver LJ032-0073|purchased by mail-order coupon from Seaport-Traders, Inc., a mail-order division of George Rose & Co., Los Angeles.|purchased by mail-order coupon from Seaport-Traders, Inc., a mail-order division of George Rose and Co., Los Angeles. LJ032-0074|The mail-order coupon listed the purchaser as "A. J. Hidell Age 28
with the address of post office box 2915 in Dallas.
Handwriting experts from the FBI and the Treasury Department testified that the writing on the mail-order form was that of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Among other identification cards in Oswald's wallet at the time of his arrest were a Selective Service notice of classification,
a Selective Service registration certificate, and a certificate of service in the U.S. Marine Corps, all three cards being in his own name.
Also in his wallet at that time
were a Selective Service notice of classification and a Marine certificate of service in the name of Alek James Hidell.
On the Hidell Selective Service card there appeared a signature, "Alek J. Hidell,"
and the photograph of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Experts on questioned documents from the Treasury Department and the FBI testified that the Hidell cards were counterfeit photographic reproductions
made by photographing the Oswald cards, retouching the resulting negatives, and producing prints from the retouched negatives.
The Hidell signature on the notice of classification was in the handwriting of Oswald.
In Oswald's personal effects found in his room at 1026 North Beckley Avenue in Dallas
was a purported international certificate of vaccination signed by "Dr. A. J. Hideel,
Post Office Box 30016, New Orleans
It certified that Lee Harvey Oswald had been vaccinated for smallpox on June 8, 1963.
This, too, was a forgery. The signature of "A. J. Hideel" was in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald.
There is no "Dr. Hideel" licensed to practice medicine in Louisiana.
There is no post office box 30016 in the New Orleans Post Office
but Oswald had rented post office box 30061 in New Orleans on June 3, 1963,
listing Marina Oswald and A. J. Hidell
as additional persons entitled to receive mail in the box. The New Orleans postal authorities had not discarded the portion of the application
listing the names of those, other than the owner of the box, entitled to receive mail through the box.
Expert testimony confirmed that the writing on this application was that of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Hidell's name on the post office box application was part of Oswald's use of a nonexistent Hidell
to serve as president of the so-called New Orleans Chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Marina Oswald
testified that she first learned of Oswald's use of the fictitious name "Hidell" in connection with his pro-Castro activities in New Orleans.
According to her testimony, he compelled her to write the name "Hidell" on membership cards in the space designated for the signature of the "Chapter President."
The name "Hidell" was stamped on some of the "Chapter's" printed literature and on the membership application blanks.
Marina Oswald testified,
quote, I knew there was no such organization. And I know Hidell is merely an altered Fidel, and I laughed at such foolishness.
end quote. Hidell was a fictitious president of an organization of which Oswald was the only member.
When seeking employment in New Orleans,
Oswald listed a "Sgt. Robert Hidell" as a reference on one job application and "George Hidell" as a reference on another.
Both names were found to be fictitious.
Moreover, the use of "Alek" as a first name for Hidell is a further link to Oswald because "Alek" was Oswald's nickname in Russia.
Letters received by Marina Oswald from her husband signed "Alek" were given to the Commission.
Oswald's Palmprint on Rifle Barrel
Based on the above evidence, the Commission concluded that Oswald purchased the rifle found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building.
Additional evidence of ownership was provided in the form of palmprint identification which indicated that Oswald had possession of the rifle he had purchased.
A few minutes after the rifle was discovered on the sixth floor of the Depository Building
it was examined by Lt. J. C. Day of the identification bureau of the Dallas police.
He lifted the rifle by the wooden stock after his examination convinced him that the wood was too rough to take fingerprints.
Capt. J. W. Fritz then ejected a cartridge by operating the bolt,
but only after Day viewed the knob on the bolt through a magnifying glass and found no prints.
Day continued to examine the rifle with the magnifying glass, looking for possible fingerprints.
He applied fingerprint powder to the side of the metal housing near the trigger, and noticed traces of two prints.
At 11:45 p.m. on November 22,
the rifle was released to the FBI and forwarded to Washington where it was examined on the morning of November 23
by Sebastian F. Latona, supervisor of the Latent Fingerprint Section of the FBI's Identification Division.
In his testimony before the Commission, Latona stated that when he received the rifle, the area where prints were visible was protected by cellophane.
He examined these prints, as well as photographs of them which the Dallas police had made, and concluded that:
the formations, the ridge formations and characteristics, were insufficient for purposes of either effecting identification
or a determination that the print was not identical with the prints of people.
Accordingly, my opinion simply was that the latent prints which were there were of no value, end quote.
Latona then processed the complete weapon but developed no identifiable prints.
He stated that the poor quality of the wood and the metal would cause the rifle to absorb moisture from the skin, thereby making a clear print unlikely.
On November 22, however, before surrendering possession of the rifle to the FBI Laboratory,
Lieutenant Day of the Dallas Police Department had "lifted" a palmprint from the underside of the gun barrel
quote, near the firing end of the barrel about 3 inches under the woodstock when I took the woodstock loose, end quote,
Lifting" a print involves the use of adhesive material to remove the fingerprint powder which adheres to the original print.|"Lifting" a print involves the use of adhesive material to remove the fingerprint powder which adheres to the original print. LJ032-0136|In this way the powdered impression is actually removed from the object.|In this way the powdered impression is actually removed from the object. LJ032-0137|The lifting had been so complete in this case that there was no trace of the print on the rifle itself when it was examined by Latona.|The lifting had been so complete in this case that there was no trace of the print on the rifle itself when it was examined by Latona. LJ032-0138|Nor was there any indication that the lift had been performed.|Nor was there any indication that the lift had been performed. LJ032-0139|Day, on the other hand, believed that sufficient traces of the print had been left on the rifle barrel,|Day, on the other hand, believed that sufficient traces of the print had been left on the rifle barrel, LJ032-0140|because he did not release the lifted print until November 26, when he received instructions to send "everything that we had" to the FBI.|because he did not release the lifted print until November twenty-six, when he received instructions to send "everything that we had" to the FBI. LJ032-0141|The print arrived in the FBI Laboratory in Washington on November 29, mounted on a card on which Lieutenant Day had written the words|The print arrived in the FBI Laboratory in Washington on November twenty-nine, mounted on a card on which Lieutenant Day had written the words LJ032-0142|quote, off underside gun barrel near end of grip C2766, end quote,|quote, off underside gun barrel near end of grip C two seven six six, end quote, LJ032-0143|The print's positive identity as having been lifted from the rifle|The print's positive identity as having been lifted from the rifle LJ032-0144|was confirmed by FBI Laboratory tests which established that the adhesive material bearing the print|was confirmed by FBI Laboratory tests which established that the adhesive material bearing the print LJ032-0145|also bore impressions of the same irregularities that appeared on the barrel of the rifle.|also bore impressions of the same irregularities that appeared on the barrel of the rifle. LJ032-0146|Latona testified that this palmprint was the right palmprint of Lee Harvey Oswald.|Latona testified that this palmprint was the right palmprint of Lee Harvey Oswald. LJ032-0147|At the request of the Commission, Arthur Mandella,|At the request of the Commission, Arthur Mandella, LJ032-0148|fingerprint expert with the New York City Police Department, conducted an independent examination and also determined that this was the right palmprint of Oswald.|fingerprint expert with the New York City Police Department, conducted an independent examination and also determined that this was the right palmprint of Oswald. LJ032-0149|Latona's findings were also confirmed by Ronald G. Wittmus, another FBI fingerprint expert.|Latona's findings were also confirmed by Ronald G. Wittmus, another FBI fingerprint expert. LJ032-0150|In the opinion of these experts, it was not possible to estimate the time which elapsed between the placing of the print on the rifle and the date of the lift.|In the opinion of these experts, it was not possible to estimate the time which elapsed between the placing of the print on the rifle and the date of the lift. LJ032-0151|Experts testifying before the Commission agreed that palmprints are as unique as fingerprints for purposes of establishing identification.|Experts testifying before the Commission agreed that palmprints are as unique as fingerprints for purposes of establishing identification. LJ032-0152|Oswald's palmprint on the underside of the barrel demonstrates that he handled the rifle when it was disassembled.|Oswald's palmprint on the underside of the barrel demonstrates that he handled the rifle when it was disassembled. LJ032-0153|A palmprint could not be placed on this portion of the rifle, when assembled, because the wooden foregrip covers the barrel at this point.|A palmprint could not be placed on this portion of the rifle, when assembled, because the wooden foregrip covers the barrel at this point. LJ032-0154|The print is additional proof that the rifle was in Oswald's possession.|The print is additional proof that the rifle was in Oswald's possession. LJ032-0155|Fibers on Rifle|Fibers on Rifle LJ032-0156|In a crevice between the butt plate of the rifle and the wooden stock|In a crevice between the butt plate of the rifle and the wooden stock LJ032-0157|was a tuft of several cotton fibers of dark blue, gray-black, and orange-yellow shades.|was a tuft of several cotton fibers of dark blue, gray-black, and orange-yellow shades. LJ032-0158|On November 23, 1963,|On November twenty-three, nineteen sixty-three, LJ032-0159|these fibers were examined by Paul M. Stombaugh, a special agent assigned to the Hair and Fiber Unit of the FBI Laboratory.|these fibers were examined by Paul M. Stombaugh, a special agent assigned to the Hair and Fiber Unit of the FBI Laboratory. LJ032-0160|He compared them with the fibers found in the shirt which Oswald was wearing when arrested in the Texas Theatre.|He compared them with the fibers found in the shirt which Oswald was wearing when arrested in the Texas Theatre. LJ032-0161|This shirt was also composed of dark blue, gray- black and orange-yellow cotton fibers.|This shirt was also composed of dark blue, gray- black and orange-yellow cotton fibers. LJ032-0162|Stombaugh testified that the colors, shades, and twist of the fibers found in the tuft on the rifle matched those in Oswald's shirt.|Stombaugh testified that the colors, shades, and twist of the fibers found in the tuft on the rifle matched those in Oswald's shirt. LJ032-0163|Stombaugh explained in his testimony that in fiber analysis, as distinct from fingerprint or firearms identification,|Stombaugh explained in his testimony that in fiber analysis, as distinct from fingerprint or firearms identification, LJ032-0164|it is not possible to state with scientific certainty that a particular small group of fibers come from a certain piece of clothing|it is not possible to state with scientific certainty that a particular small group of fibers come from a certain piece of clothing LJ032-0165|to the exclusion of all others because there are not enough microscopic characteristics present in fibers.|to the exclusion of all others because there are not enough microscopic characteristics present in fibers. LJ032-0166|Judgments as to probability will depend on the number and types of matches.|Judgments as to probability will depend on the number and types of matches. LJ032-0167|He concluded, quote, There is no doubt in my mind that these fibers could have come from this shirt.|He concluded, quote, There is no doubt in my mind that these fibers could have come from this shirt. LJ032-0168|There is no way, however, to eliminate the possibility of the fibers having come from another identical shirt, end quote,|There is no way, however, to eliminate the possibility of the fibers having come from another identical shirt, end quote, LJ032-0169|Having considered the probabilities as explained in Stombaugh's testimony,|Having considered the probabilities as explained in Stombaugh's testimony, LJ032-0170|the Commission has concluded that the fibers in the tuft on the rifle most probably came from the shirt worn by Oswald when he was arrested,|the Commission has concluded that the fibers in the tuft on the rifle most probably came from the shirt worn by Oswald when he was arrested, LJ032-0171|and that this was the same shirt which Oswald wore on the morning of the assassination.|and that this was the same shirt which Oswald wore on the morning of the assassination. LJ032-0172|Marina Oswald testified that she thought her husband wore this shirt to work on that day.|Marina Oswald testified that she thought her husband wore this shirt to work on that day. LJ032-0173|The testimony of those who saw him after the assassination was inconclusive about the color of Oswald's shirt,|The testimony of those who saw him after the assassination was inconclusive about the color of Oswald's shirt, LJ032-0174|but Mary Bledsoe, a former landlady of Oswald, saw him on a bus approximately 10 minutes after the assassination|but Mary Bledsoe, a former landlady of Oswald, saw him on a bus approximately ten minutes after the assassination LJ032-0175|and identified the shirt as being the one worn by Oswald primarily because of a distinctive hole in the shirt's right elbow.|and identified the shirt as being the one worn by Oswald primarily because of a distinctive hole in the shirt's right elbow. LJ032-0176|Moreover, the bus transfer which he obtained as he left the bus was still in the pocket when he was arrested.|Moreover, the bus transfer which he obtained as he left the bus was still in the pocket when he was arrested. LJ032-0177|Although Oswald returned to his roominghouse after the assassination and when questioned by the police, claimed to have changed his shirt,|Although Oswald returned to his roominghouse after the assassination and when questioned by the police, claimed to have changed his shirt, LJ032-0178|the evidence indicates that he continued wearing the same shirt which he was wearing all morning and which he was still wearing when arrested.|the evidence indicates that he continued wearing the same shirt which he was wearing all morning and which he was still wearing when arrested. LJ032-0179|In light of these findings the Commission evaluated the additional testimony of Stombaugh|In light of these findings the Commission evaluated the additional testimony of Stombaugh LJ032-0180|that the fibers were caught in the crevice of the rifle's butt plate, quote, in the recent past, end quote,|that the fibers were caught in the crevice of the rifle's butt plate, quote, in the recent past, end quote, LJ032-0181|Although Stombaugh was unable to estimate the period of time the fibers were on the rifle he said that the fibers, quote,|Although Stombaugh was unable to estimate the period of time the fibers were on the rifle he said that the fibers, quote, LJ032-0182|were clean, they had good color to them, there was no grease on them and they were not fragmented. They looked as if they had just been picked up, end quote.|were clean, they had good color to them, there was no grease on them and they were not fragmented. They looked as if they had just been picked up, end quote. LJ032-0183|The relative freshness of the fibers is strong evidence that they were caught on the rifle on the morning of the assassination or during the preceding evening.|The relative freshness of the fibers is strong evidence that they were caught on the rifle on the morning of the assassination or during the preceding evening. LJ032-0184|For 10 days prior to the eve of the assassination Oswald had not been present at Ruth Paine's house in Irving, Texas, where the rifle was kept.|For ten days prior to the eve of the assassination Oswald had not been present at Ruth Paine's house in Irving, Texas, where the rifle was kept. LJ032-0185|Moreover, the Commission found no reliable evidence that Oswald used the rifle at any time between September 23,|Moreover, the Commission found no reliable evidence that Oswald used the rifle at any time between September twenty-three, LJ032-0186|when it was transported from New Orleans, and November 22, the day of the assassination.|when it was transported from New Orleans, and November twenty-two, the day of the assassination. LJ032-0187|The fact that on the morning of the assassination Oswald was wearing the shirt from which these relatively fresh fibers most probably originated,|The fact that on the morning of the assassination Oswald was wearing the shirt from which these relatively fresh fibers most probably originated, LJ032-0188|provides some evidence that they were placed on the rifle that day|provides some evidence that they were placed on the rifle that day LJ032-0189|since there was limited, if any, opportunity for Oswald to handle the weapon during the 2 months prior to November 22.|since there was limited, if any, opportunity for Oswald to handle the weapon during the two months prior to November twenty-two. LJ032-0190|On the other hand Stombaugh pointed out that fibers might retain their freshness if the rifle had been|On the other hand Stombaugh pointed out that fibers might retain their freshness if the rifle had been LJ032-0191|quote, put aside, end quote, after catching the fibers.|quote, put aside, end quote, after catching the fibers. LJ032-0192|The rifle used in the assassination probably had been wrapped in a blanket for about 8 weeks prior to November 22.|The rifle used in the assassination probably had been wrapped in a blanket for about eight weeks prior to November twenty-two. LJ032-0193|Because the relative freshness of these fibers might be explained by the continuous storage of the rifle in the blanket,|Because the relative freshness of these fibers might be explained by the continuous storage of the rifle in the blanket, LJ032-0194|the Commission was unable to reach any firm conclusion as to when the fibers were caught in the rifle.|the Commission was unable to reach any firm conclusion as to when the fibers were caught in the rifle. LJ032-0195|The Commission was able to conclude, however, that the fibers most probably came from Oswald's shirt.|The Commission was able to conclude, however, that the fibers most probably came from Oswald's shirt. LJ032-0196|This adds to the conviction of the Commission that Oswald owned and handled the weapon used in the assassination.|This adds to the conviction of the Commission that Oswald owned and handled the weapon used in the assassination. LJ032-0197|Photograph of Oswald With Rifle|Photograph of Oswald With Rifle LJ032-0198|During the period from March 2, 1963, to April 24, 1963,|During the period from March two, nineteen sixty-three, to April twenty-four, nineteen sixty-three, LJ032-0199|the Oswalds lived on Neely Street in Dallas in a rented house which had a small back yard.|the Oswalds lived on Neely Street in Dallas in a rented house which had a small back yard. LJ032-0200|One Sunday, while his wife was hanging diapers, Oswald asked her to take a picture of him holding a rifle, a pistol|One Sunday, while his wife was hanging diapers, Oswald asked her to take a picture of him holding a rifle, a pistol LJ032-0201|and issues of two newspapers later identified as the Worker and the Militant.|and issues of two newspapers later identified as the Worker and the Militant. LJ032-0202|Two pictures were taken. The Commission has concluded that the rifle shown in these pictures is the same rifle which was found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building|Two pictures were taken. The Commission has concluded that the rifle shown in these pictures is the same rifle which was found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building LJ032-0203|on November 22, 1963. One of these pictures, Exhibit No. 133-A, shows most of the rifle's configuration.|on November twenty-two, nineteen sixty-three. One of these pictures, Exhibit Number one thirty-three A, shows most of the rifle's configuration. LJ032-0204|Special Agent Lyndal L. Shaneyfelt, a photography expert with the FBI,|Special Agent Lyndal L. Shaneyfelt, a photography expert with the FBI, LJ032-0205|photographed the rifle used in the assassination, attempting to duplicate the position of the rifle and the lighting in Exhibit No. 133-A.|photographed the rifle used in the assassination, attempting to duplicate the position of the rifle and the lighting in Exhibit Number one thirty-three A. LJ032-0206|After comparing the rifle in the simulated photograph with the rifle in Exhibit No. 133-A, Shaneyfelt testified, quote,|After comparing the rifle in the simulated photograph with the rifle in Exhibit Number one thirty-three A, Shaneyfelt testified, quote, LJ032-0207|I found it to be the same general configuration. All appearances were the same, end quote,|I found it to be the same general configuration. All appearances were the same, end quote, LJ032-0208|He found, quote, one notch in the stock at this point that appears very faintly in the photograph, end quote.|He found, quote, one notch in the stock at this point that appears very faintly in the photograph, end quote. LJ032-0209|He stated, however, that while he, quote, found no differences, end quote, between the rifles in the two photographs, he could not make a, quote, positive identification|He stated, however, that while he, quote, found no differences, end quote, between the rifles in the two photographs, he could not make a, quote, positive identification LJ032-0210|to the exclusion of all other rifles of the same general configuration, end quote.|to the exclusion of all other rifles of the same general configuration, end quote. LJ032-0211|The authenticity of these pictures has been established by expert testimony which links the second picture,|The authenticity of these pictures has been established by expert testimony which links the second picture, LJ032-0212|Commission Exhibit No. 133-B, to Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera, with which Marina Oswald testified she took the pictures.|Commission Exhibit Number one thirty-three B, to Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera, with which Marina Oswald testified she took the pictures. LJ032-0213|The negative of that picture, Commission Exhibit No. 133-B, was found among Oswald's possessions.|The negative of that picture, Commission Exhibit Number one thirty-three B, was found among Oswald's possessions. LJ032-0214|Using a recognized technique of determining whether a picture was taken with a particular camera,|Using a recognized technique of determining whether a picture was taken with a particular camera, LJ032-0215|Shaneyfelt compared this negative with a negative which he made by taking a new picture with Oswald's camera.|Shaneyfelt compared this negative with a negative which he made by taking a new picture with Oswald's camera. LJ032-0216|He concluded that the negative of Exhibit No. 133-B was exposed in Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera to the exclusion of all other cameras.|He concluded that the negative of Exhibit Number one thirty-three B was exposed in Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera to the exclusion of all other cameras. LJ032-0217|He could not test Exhibit No. 133-A in the same way because the negative was never recovered.|He could not test Exhibit Number one thirty-three A in the same way because the negative was never recovered. LJ032-0218|Both pictures, however, have identical backgrounds and lighting and, judging from the shadows, were taken at the same angle.|Both pictures, however, have identical backgrounds and lighting and, judging from the shadows, were taken at the same angle. LJ032-0219|They are photographs of the same scene.|They are photographs of the same scene. LJ032-0220|Since Exhibit No. 133-B was taken with Oswald's camera,|Since Exhibit Number one thirty-three B was taken with Oswald's camera, LJ032-0221|it is reasonably certain that Exhibit No. 133-A was taken by the same camera at the same time, as Marina Oswald testified.|it is reasonably certain that Exhibit Number one thirty-three A was taken by the same camera at the same time, as Marina Oswald testified. LJ032-0222|Moreover, Shaneyfelt testified that in his opinion the photographs were not composites of two different photographs|Moreover, Shaneyfelt testified that in his opinion the photographs were not composites of two different photographs LJ032-0223|and that Oswald's face had not been superimposed on another body.|and that Oswald's face had not been superimposed on another body. LJ032-0224|One of the photographs taken by Marina Oswald was widely published in newspapers and magazines,|One of the photographs taken by Marina Oswald was widely published in newspapers and magazines, LJ032-0225|and in many instances the details of these pictures differed from the original, and even from each other, particularly as to the configuration of the rifle.|and in many instances the details of these pictures differed from the original, and even from each other, particularly as to the configuration of the rifle. LJ032-0226|The Commission sought to determine whether these photographs were touched prior to publication.|The Commission sought to determine whether these photographs were touched prior to publication. LJ032-0227|Shaneyfelt testified that the published photographs appeared to be based on a copy of the original which the publications had each retouched differently.|Shaneyfelt testified that the published photographs appeared to be based on a copy of the original which the publications had each retouched differently. LJ032-0228|Several of the publications furnished the Commission with the prints they had used, or described by correspondence the retouching they had done.|Several of the publications furnished the Commission with the prints they had used, or described by correspondence the retouching they had done. LJ032-0229|This information enabled the Commission to conclude|This information enabled the Commission to conclude LJ032-0230|that the published pictures were the same as the original except for retouching done by these publications, apparently for the purpose of clarifying the lines of the rifle|that the published pictures were the same as the original except for retouching done by these publications, apparently for the purpose of clarifying the lines of the rifle LJ032-0231|and other details in the picture.|and other details in the picture. LJ032-0232|The dates surrounding the taking of this picture and the purchase of the rifle|The dates surrounding the taking of this picture and the purchase of the rifle LJ032-0233|reinforce the belief that the rifle in the photograph is the rifle which Oswald bought from Klein's.|reinforce the belief that the rifle in the photograph is the rifle which Oswald bought from Klein's. LJ032-0234|The rifle was shipped from Klein's in Chicago on March 20, 1963, at a time when the Oswalds were living on Neely Street.|The rifle was shipped from Klein's in Chicago on March twenty, nineteen sixty-three, at a time when the Oswalds were living on Neely Street. LJ032-0235|From an examination of one of the photographs, the Commission determined the dates of the issues of the Militant and the Worker which Oswald was holding in his hand.|From an examination of one of the photographs, the Commission determined the dates of the issues of the Militant and the Worker which Oswald was holding in his hand. LJ032-0236|By checking the actual mailing dates of these issues and the time it usually takes to effect delivery to Dallas,|By checking the actual mailing dates of these issues and the time it usually takes to effect delivery to Dallas, LJ032-0237|it was established that the photographs must have been taken sometime after March 27.|it was established that the photographs must have been taken sometime after March twenty-seven. LJ032-0238|Marina Oswald testified that the photographs were taken on a Sunday about 2 weeks before the attempted shooting of Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker|Marina Oswald testified that the photographs were taken on a Sunday about two weeks before the attempted shooting of Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker LJ032-0239|on April 10, 1963.|on April ten, nineteen sixty-three. LJ032-0240|By Sunday, March 31, 1963,|By Sunday, March thirty-one, nineteen sixty-three, LJ032-0241|10 days prior to the Walker attempt, Oswald had undoubtedly received the rifle shipped from Chicago on March 20,|ten days prior to the Walker attempt, Oswald had undoubtedly received the rifle shipped from Chicago on March twenty, LJ032-0242|the revolver shipped from Los Angeles on the same date, and the two newspapers which he was holding in the picture.|the revolver shipped from Los Angeles on the same date, and the two newspapers which he was holding in the picture. LJ032-0243|Rifle Among Oswald's Possessions|Rifle Among Oswald's Possessions LJ032-0244|Marina Oswald testified that the rifle found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building was the "fateful rifle of Lee Oswald.
Moreover, it was the only rifle owned by her husband following his return from the Soviet Union in June 1962.
It had been purchased in March 1963, and taken to New Orleans where Marina Oswald saw it in their rented apartment
during the summer of 1963.
It appears from his wife's testimony
that Oswald may have sat on the screened-in porch at night practicing with the rifle by looking through the telescopic sight and operating the bolt.
In September 1963,
Oswald loaded their possessions into a station wagon owned by Ruth Paine, who had invited Marina Oswald and the baby to live at her home in Irving, Texas.
Marina Oswald has stated that the rifle was among these possessions, although Ruth Paine testified that she was not aware of it.
From September 24, 1963, when Marina Oswald arrived in Irving from New Orleans, until the morning of the assassination,
the rifle was, according to the evidence, stored in a green and brown blanket in the Paines' garage among the Oswalds' other possessions.
About 1 week after the return from New Orleans,
Marina Oswald was looking in the garage for parts to the baby's crib and thought that the parts might be in the blanket.
When she started to open the blanket, she saw the stock of the rifle.
Ruth and Michael Paine both noticed the rolled-up blanket in the garage during the time that Marina Oswald was living in their home.
On several occasions, Michael Paine moved the blanket in the garage.
He thought it contained tent poles, or possibly other camping equipment such as a folding shovel.
When he appeared before the Commission, Michael Paine lifted the blanket
with the rifle wrapped inside and testified that it appeared to be the same approximate weight and shape as the package in his garage.
About 3 hours after the assassination, a detective and deputy sheriff saw the blanket-roll,
tied with a string, lying on the floor of the Paines' garage.
Each man testified that he thought he could detect the outline of a rifle in the blanket, even though the blanket was empty.
Paul M. Stombaugh, of the FBI Laboratory,
examined the blanket and discovered a bulge approximately 10 inches long midway in the blanket.
This bulge was apparently caused by a hard protruding object which had stretched the blanket's fibers.
It could have been caused by the telescopic sight of the rifle which was approximately 11 inches long.
Having reviewed the evidence that (1) Lee Harvey Oswald purchased the rifle used in the assassination,
(2) Oswald's palmprint was on the rifle in a position which shows that he had handled it while it was disassembled,
(3) fibers found on the rifle most probably came from the shirt Oswald was wearing on the day of the assassination,
(4) a photograph taken in the yard of Oswald's apartment showed him holding this rifle, and (5)
the rifle was kept among Oswald's possessions from the time of its purchase until the day of the assassination,
the Commission concluded that the rifle used to assassinate President Kennedy and wound Governor Connally was owned and possessed by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 2.
The rifle in the building.
The Commission has evaluated the evidence tending to show how Lee Harvey Oswald's Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, serial number C2766,
was brought into the Depository Building, where it was found on the sixth floor shortly after the assassination.
In this connection the Commission considered (1)
the circumstances surrounding Oswald's return to Irving, Texas, on Thursday, November 21, 1963,
(2) the disappearance of the rifle from its normal place of storage, (3)
Oswald's arrival at the Depository Building on November 22, carrying a long and bulky brown paper package,
the presence of a long handmade brown paper bag near the point from which the shots were fired, and (5) the palmprint,
fiber, and paper analyses linking Oswald and the assassination weapon to this bag.
The Curtain Rod Story
During October and November of 1963,
Lee Harvey Oswald lived in a roominghouse in Dallas while his wife and children lived in Irving, at the home of Ruth Paine,
approximately 15 miles from Oswald's place of work at the Texas School Book Depository.
Oswald traveled between Dallas and Irving on weekends in a car driven by a neighbor of the Paines, Buell Wesley Frazier,
who also worked at the Depository.
Oswald generally would go to Irving on Friday afternoon and return to Dallas Monday morning.
According to the testimony of Frazier, Marina Oswald, and Ruth Paine, it appears that Oswald never returned to Irving in midweek
prior to November 21, 1963, except on Monday, October 21, when he visited his wife in the hospital
after the birth of their second child.
During the morning of November 21, Oswald asked Frazier whether he could ride home with him that afternoon.
Frazier, surprised, asked him why he was going to Irving on Thursday night rather than Friday.
Oswald replied, quote, I'm going home to get some curtain rods to put in an apartment, end quote.
The two men left work at 4:40 p.m. and drove to Irving.
There was little conversation between them on the way home.
Mrs. Linnie Mae Randle, Frazier's sister, commented to her brother about Oswald's unusual midweek return to Irving.
Frazier told her that Oswald had come home to get curtain rods.
It would appear, however, that obtaining curtain rods was not the purpose of Oswald's trip to Irving on November 21.
Mrs. A. C. Johnson, his landlady, testified that Oswald's room at 1026 North Beckley Avenue
had curtains and curtain rods, and that Oswald had never discussed the subject with her.
In the Paines' garage, along with many other objects of a household character,
there were two flat lightweight curtain rods belonging to Ruth Paine but they were still there on Friday afternoon after Oswald's arrest.
Oswald never asked Mrs. Paine about the use of curtain rods,
and Marina Oswald testified that Oswald did not say anything about curtain rods on the day before the assassination.
No curtain rods were known to have been discovered in the Depository Building after the assassination.
In deciding whether Oswald carried a rifle to work in a long paper bag on November 22,
the Commission gave weight to the fact that Oswald gave a false reason for returning home on November 21,
and one which provided an excuse for the carrying of a bulky package the following morning.
Before dinner on November 21, Oswald played on the lawn of the Paines' home with his daughter June.
After dinner Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald were busy cleaning house and preparing their children for bed.
Between the hours of 8 and 9 p.m. they were occupied with the children in the bedrooms located at the extreme east end of the house.
On the west end of the house is the attached garage, which can be reached from the kitchen or from the outside.
In the garage were the personal belongings of the Oswald family including, as the evidence has shown, the rifle wrapped in the old brown and green blanket.
At approximately 9 p.m., after the children had been put to bed, Mrs. Paine, according to her testimony before the Commission, quote,
went out to the garage to paint some children's blocks, and worked in the garage for half an hour or so.
I noticed when I went out that the light was on, end quote,
Mrs. Paine was certain that she had not left the light on in the garage after dinner.
According to Mrs. Paine, Oswald had gone to bed by 9 p.m.;
Marina Oswald testified that it was between 9 and 10 p.m.
Neither Marina Oswald nor Ruth Paine saw Oswald in the garage.
The period between 8 and 9 p.m., however, provided ample opportunity for Oswald to prepare the rifle for his departure the next morning.
Only if disassembled could the rifle fit into the paper bag found near the window from which the shots were fired.
A firearms expert with the FBI assembled the rifle in 6 minutes using a 10-cent coin as a tool,
and he could disassemble it more rapidly.
While the rifle may have already been disassembled when Oswald arrived home on Thursday, he had ample time that evening to disassemble the rifle
and insert it into the paper bag.
On the day of the assassination, Marina Oswald was watching television when she learned of the shooting.
A short time later Mrs. Paine told her that someone had shot the President, quote, from the building in which Lee is working, end quote.
Marina Oswald testified that at that time, quote, My heart dropped.
I then went to the garage to see whether the rifle was there and I saw that the blanket was still there and I said Thank God, end quote.
She did not unroll the blanket. She saw that it was in its usual position and it appeared to her to have something inside.
Soon afterward, at about 3 p.m., police officers arrived and searched the house.
Mrs. Paine pointed out that most of the Oswalds' possessions were in the garage.
With Ruth Paine acting as an interpreter, Detective Rose asked Marina whether her husband had a rifle.
Mrs. Paine, who had no knowledge of the rifle, first said "No," but when the question was translated, Marina Oswald replied "Yes."
She pointed to the blanket which was on the floor very close to where Ruth Paine was standing.
Mrs. Paine testified, quote,
As she [Marina] told me about it I stepped onto the blanket roll
And she indicated to me that she had peered into this roll and saw a portion of what she took to be a gun she knew her husband to have, a rifle.
And I then translated this to the officers that she knew that her husband had a gun that he had stored in here.
I then stepped off of it and the officer picked it up in the middle and it bent so.
Mrs. Paine had the actual blanket before her as she testified and she indicated that the blanket hung limp in the officer's hand.
Marina Oswald testified that this was her first knowledge that the rifle was not in its accustomed place.
The Long and Bulky Package
On the morning of November 22, 1963,
Lee Harvey Oswald left the Paine house in Irving at approximately 7:15 a.m., while Marina Oswald was still in bed.
Neither she nor Mrs. Paine saw him leave the house. About half-a-block away from the Paine house was the residence of Mrs. Linnie Mae Randle,
sister of the man with whom Oswald drove to work -- Buell Wesley Frazier.
Mrs. Randle stated that on the morning of November 22, while her brother was eating breakfast,
she looked out the breakfast-room window and saw Oswald cross the street and walk toward the driveway where her brother parked his car near the carport.
He carried a, quote, heavy brown bag, end quote.
Oswald gripped the bag in his right hand near the top, quote, It tapered like this as he hugged it in his hand.
It was more bulky toward the bottom, end quote, than toward the top.
She then opened the kitchen door and saw Oswald open the right rear door of her brother's car and place the package in the back of the car.
Mrs. Randle estimated that the package was approximately 28 inches long and about 8 inches wide.
She thought that its color was similar to that of the bag found on the sixth floor of the School Book Depository after the assassination.
Frazier met Oswald at the kitchen door and together they walked to the car.
After entering the car, Frazier glanced over his shoulder and noticed a brown paper package on the back seat.
He asked, quote, What's the package, Lee? End quote. Oswald replied, quote, curtain rods, end quote.
Frazier told the Commission, quote,
the main reason he was going over there that Thursday afternoon when he was to bring back some curtain rods, so I didn't think any more about it when he told me that, end quote,
Frazier estimated that the bag was 2 feet long, quote, give and take a few inches, end quote, and about 5 or 6 inches wide.
As they sat in the car, Frazier asked Oswald where his lunch was, and Oswald replied that he was going to buy his lunch that day.
Frazier testified that Oswald carried no lunch bag that day.
quote, when he rode with me, I say he always brought lunch except that one day on November 22 he didn't bring his lunch that day, end quote,
Frazier parked the car in the company parking lot about 2 blocks north of the Depository Building.
Oswald left the car first, picked up the brown paper bag, and proceeded toward the building ahead of Frazier.
Frazier walked behind and as they crossed the railroad tracks he watched the switching of the cars.
Frazier recalled that one end of the package was under Oswald's armpit and the lower part was held with his right hand
so that it was carried straight and parallel to his body.
When Oswald entered the rear door of the Depository Building, he was about 50 feet ahead of Frazier.
It was the first time that Oswald had not walked with Frazier from the parking lot to the building entrance.
When Frazier entered the building, he did not see Oswald.
One employee, Jack Dougherty,
believed that he saw Oswald coming to work, but he does not remember that Oswald had anything in his hands as he entered the door.
No other employee has been found who saw Oswald enter that morning.
In deciding whether Oswald carried the assassination weapon in the bag which Frazier and Mrs. Randle saw,
the Commission has carefully considered the testimony of these two witnesses with regard to the length of the bag.
Frazier and Mrs. Randle testified
that the bag which Oswald was carrying was approximately 27 or 28 inches long, whereas the wooden stock of the rifle, which is its largest component,
measured 34.8 inches.
The bag found on the sixth floor was 88 inches long.
When Frazier appeared before the Commission and was asked to demonstrate how Oswald carried the package, he said, quote, Like I said,
I remember that I didn't look at the package very much but when I did look at it he did have his hands on the package like that, end quote, and at this point
Frazier placed the upper part of the package under his armpit and attempted to cup his right hand beneath the bottom of the bag.
The disassembled rifle was too long to be carried in this manner.
Similarly, when the butt of the rifle was placed in Frazier's hand, it extended above his shoulder to ear level.
Moreover, in an interview on December 1, 1963, with agents of the FBI, Frazier had marked the point on the back seat of his car
which he believed was where the bag reached when it was laid on the seat with one edge against the door.
The distance between the point on the seat and the door was 27 inches.
Mrs. Randle said, when shown the paper bag,
that the bag she saw Oswald carrying, quote, wasn't that long, I mean it was folded down at the top as I told you. It definitely wasn't that long, end quote,
And she folded the bag to length of about 28 and a half inches.
Frazier doubted whether the bag that Oswald carried was as wide as the bag found on the sixth floor, although Mrs. Randle testified
that the width was approximately the same.
The Commission has weighed the visual recollection of Frazier and Mrs. Randle against the evidence here presented
that the bag Oswald carried contained the assassination weapon and has concluded that Frazier and Randle are mistaken as to the length of the bag.
Mrs. Randle saw the bag fleetingly
and her first remembrance is that it was held in Oswald's right hand, quote, and it almost touched the ground as he carried it, end quote.
Frazier's view of the bag was from the rear. He continually advised that he was not paying close attention. For example, he said, quote,
I didn't pay too much attention the way he was walking because I was walking along there looking at the railroad cars and watching the men on the diesel switch them cars
and I didn't pay too much attention on how he carried the package at all, end quote.
Frazier could easily have been mistaken when he stated that Oswald held the bottom of the bag cupped in his hand with the upper end tucked into his armpit.
Location of Bag
A handmade bag of wrapping paper and tape was found in the southeast corner of the sixth floor alongside the window from which the shots were fired.
It was not a standard type bag which could be obtained in a store and it was presumably made for a particular purpose.
It was the appropriate size to contain, in disassembled form,
Oswald's Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, serial No. C2766, which was also found on the sixth floor.
Three cartons had been placed at the window apparently to act as a gun rest and a fourth carton was placed behind those at the window.
A person seated on the fourth carton could assemble the rifle without being seen from the rest of the sixth floor
because the cartons stacked around the southeast corner would shield him.
The presence of the bag in this corner is cogent evidence that it was used as the container for the rifle.
At the time the bag was found, Lieutenant Day of the Dallas police wrote on it, quote, Found next to the sixth floor window gun fired from.
May have been used to carry gun. Lt. J. C. Day, end quote.
Scientific Evidence Linking Rifle and Oswald to Paper Bag
Oswald's fingerprint and palmprint found on bag.
Using a standard chemical method involving silver nitrates
the FBI Laboratory developed a latent palmprint and latent fingerprint on the bag.
Sebastian F. Latona, supervisor of the FBI's Latent Fingerprint Section,
identified these prints as the left index fingerprint and right palmprint of Lee Harvey Oswald
The portion of the palm which was identified was the heel of the right palm, i.e., the area near the wrist, on the little finger side.
These prints were examined independently by Ronald G. Wittmus of the FBI,
and by Arthur Mandella, a fingerprint expert with the New York City Police Department.
Both concluded that the prints were the right palm and left index finger of Lee Oswald. No other identifiable prints were found on the bag.
Oswald's palmprint on the bottom of the paper bag indicated, of course, that he had handled the bag.
Furthermore, it was consistent with the bag having contained a heavy or bulky object when he handled it since a light object is usually held by the fingers.
The palmprint was found on the closed end of the bag.
It was from Oswald's right hand, in which he carried the long package as he walked from Frazier's car to the building.
Materials used to make bag.
On the day of the assassination, the Dallas police obtained a sample of wrapping paper and tape
from the shipping room of the Depository and forwarded it to the FBI Laboratory in Washington.
James C. Cadigan, a questioned-documents expert with the Bureau, compared the samples with the paper and tape in the actual bag.
He testified, quote,
In all of the observations and physical tests that I made I found the bag and the paper sample were the same, end quote.
Among other tests, the paper and tape were submitted to fiber analysis and spectrographic examination.
In addition the tape was compared to determine whether the sample tape and the tape on the bag had been taken from the tape dispensing machine at the Depository.
When asked to explain the similarity of characteristics, Cadigan stated, quote, well briefly
it would be the thickness of both the paper and the tape, the color under various lighting conditions of both the paper and the tape,
the width of the tape, the knurled markings on the surface of the fiber, the texture of the fiber, the letting pattern
I found that the paper sack found on the sixth floor and the sample
had the same observable characteristics both under the microscope and all the visual tests that I could conduct.
The papers I also found were similar in fiber composition, therefore, in addition to the visual characteristics,
microscopic and UV (ultra violet) characteristics, end quote.
Mr. Cadigan concluded that the paper and tape from the bag were identical in all respects to the sample paper and tape
taken from the Texas School Book Depository shipping room on November 22, 1963.
On December 1, 1963, a replica bag was made from materials found on that date in the shipping room.
This was done as an investigatory aid
since the original bag had been discolored during various laboratory examinations and could not be used for valid identification by witnesses.
Cadigan found that the paper used to make this replica sack had different characteristics from the paper in the original bag.
The science of paper analysis enabled him to distinguish between different rolls of paper even though they were produced by the same manufacturer.
Since the Depository normally used approximately one roll of paper every 3 working days,
it was not surprising that the replica sack made on December 1, 1963,
had different characteristics from both the actual bag and the sample taken on November 22.
On the other hand, since two rolls could be made from the same batch of paper,
one cannot estimate when, prior to November 22, Oswald made the paper bag.
However, the complete identity of characteristics between the paper and tape in the bag found on the sixth floor
and the paper and tape found in the shipping room of the Depository on November 22
enabled the Commission to conclude that the bag was made from these materials.
The Depository shipping department was on the first floor to which Oswald had access in the normal performance of his duties filling orders.
Fibers in paper bag matched fibers in blanket
When Paul M. Stombaugh of the FBI Laboratory examined the paper bag,
he found, on the inside, a single brown delustered viscose fiber and several light green cotton fibers.
The blanket in which the rifle was stored was composed of brown and green cotton, viscose and woolen fibers.
The single brown viscose fiber found in the bag matched some of the brown viscose fibers from the blanket in all observable characteristics.
The green cotton fibers found in the paper bag matched some of the green cotton fibers in the blanket
quote, in all observable microscopic characteristics, end quote.
Despite these matches, however, Stombaugh was unable to render on opinion that the fibers which he found in the bag had probably come from the blanket,
because other types of fibers present in the blanket were not found in the bag.
He concluded, quote,
All I would say here is that it is possible that these fibers could have come from this blanket.
because this blanket is composed of brown and green woolen fibers, brown and green delustered viscose fibers, and brown and green cotton fibers.
We found no brown cotton fibers, no green viscose fibers, and no woolen fibers.
So if I found all of these then I would have been able to say these fibers probably had come from this blanket. But since I found so few,
then I would say the possibility exists, these fibers could have come from this blanket, end quote.
Stombaugh confirmed that the rifle could have picked up fibers from the blanket and transferred them to the paper bag.
In light of the other evidence linking Lee Harvey Oswald, the blanket, and the rifle to the paper bag found on the sixth floor,
the Commission considered Stombaugh's testimony of probative value in deciding whether Oswald carried the rifle into the building in the paper bag.
The preponderance of the evidence supports the conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald (1)
told the curtain rod story to Frazier to explain both the return to Irving on a Thursday
and the obvious bulk of the package which he intended to bring to work the next day;
(2) took paper and tape from the wrapping bench of the Depository and fashioned a bag large enough to carry the disassembled rifle;
(3) removed the rifle from the blanket in the Paines' garage on Thursday evening;
(4) carried the rifle into the Depository Building, concealed in the bag;
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 3.
Oswald at Window
Lee Harvey Oswald was hired on October 15, 1963, by the Texas School Book Depository as an "order filler."
He worked principally on the first and sixth floors of the building, gathering books listed on orders and delivering them to the shipping room on the first floor.
He had ready access to the sixth floor, from the southeast corner window of which the shots were fired.
The Commission evaluated the physical evidence found near the window after the assassination and the testimony of eyewitnesses
in deciding whether Lee Harvey Oswald was present at this window at the time of the assassination.
Palmprints and Fingerprints on Cartons and Paper Bag
Below the southeast corner window on the sixth floor was a large carton of books
measuring approximately 18 by 12 by 14 inches which had been moved from a stack along the south wall.
Atop this carton was a small carton marked "Rolling Readers," measuring approximately 13 by 9 by 8 inches.
In front of this small carton and resting partially on the windowsill was another small "Rolling Readers" carton.
These two small cartons had been moved from a stack about three aisles away.
The boxes in the window appeared to have been arranged as a convenient gun rest.
Behind these boxes was another carton placed on the floor on which a man sitting
could look southwesterly down Elm Street over the top of the "Rolling Readers" cartons.
Next to these cartons was the handmade paper bag, previously discussed,
on which appeared the print of the left index finger and right palm of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The cartons were forwarded to the FBI in Washington.
Sebastian F. Latona, supervisor of the Latent Fingerprint Section,
testified that 20 identifiable fingerprints and 8 palmprints were developed on these cartons.
The carton on the windowsill and the large carton below the window contained no prints which could be identified as being those of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The other "Rolling Readers" carton, however, contained a palmprint and a fingerprint which were identified by Latona
as being the left palmprint and right index fingerprint of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Commission has considered the possibility that the cartons might have been moved in connection with the work that was being performed on the sixth floor on November 22.
Depository employees were laying a new floor at the west end and transferring books from the west to the east end of the building.
The "Rolling Readers" cartons, however, had not been moved by the floor layers and had apparently been taken to the window from their regular position for some particular purpose.
The "Rolling Readers" boxes contained, instead of books, light blocks used as reading aids.
They could be easily adjusted and were still solid enough to serve as a gun rest.
The box on the floor, behind the three near the window,
had been one of these moved by the floor layers from the west wall to near the east side of the building in preparation for the laying of the floor.
During the afternoon of November 22,
Lieutenant Day of the Dallas police dusted this carton with powder and developed a palmprint on the top edge of the carton on the side nearest the window.
The position of this palmprint on the carton was parallel with the long axis of the box, and at right angles with the short axis;
the bottom of the palm rested on the box.
Someone sitting on the box facing the window would have his palm in this position if he placed his hand alongside his right hip.
This print which had been cut out of the box was also forwarded to the FBI and Latona identified it as Oswald's right palmprint.
In Latona's opinion, quote,
not too long, end quote, a time had elapsed between the time that the print was placed on the carton and the time that it had been developed by the Dallas police.
Although Bureau experiments had shown that 24 hours was a likely maximum time, Latona stated
that he could only testify with certainty that the print was less than 3 days old.
The print, therefore, could have been placed on the carton at any time within this period.
The freshness of this print could be estimated only because the Dallas police developed it through the use of powder.
Since cartons absorb perspiration, powder can successfully develop a print on such material only within a limited time.
When the FBI in Washington received the cartons, the remaining prints, including Oswald's on the Rolling Readers carton,
were developed by chemical processes.
The freshness of prints developed in this manner cannot be estimated,
so no conclusions can be drawn as to whether these remaining prints preceded or followed the print developed in Dallas by powder.
Most of the prints were found to have been placed on the cartons by an FBI clerk
and a Dallas police officer after the cartons had been processed with powder by the Dallas Police.
In his independent investigation, Arthur Mandella of the New York City Police Department
reached the same conclusion as Latona that the prints found on the cartons were those of Lee Harvey Oswald.
In addition, Mandella was of the opinion that the print taken from the carton on the floor
was probably made within a day or a day and a half of the examination on November 22.
Another expert with the FBI, Ronald G. Wittmus, conducted a separate examination and also agreed with Latona that the prints were Oswald's.
In evaluating the significance of these fingerprint and palmprint identifications,
the Commission considered the possibility that Oswald handled these cartons as part of his normal duties.
Since other identifiable prints were developed on the cartons, the Commission requested that they be compared with the prints of the 12 warehouse employees
who, like Oswald, might have handled the cartons. They were also compared with the prints of those law enforcement officials who might have handled the cartons.
The results of this investigation are fully discussed in chapter 6, page 249.
Although a person could handle a carton and not leave identifiable prints,
none of these employees except Oswald left identifiable prints on the cartons.
This finding, in addition to the freshness of one of the prints and the presence of Oswald's prints on two of the four cartons and the paper bag
led the Commission to attach some probative value to the fingerprint and palmprint identifications in reaching the conclusion
that Oswald was at the window from which the shots were fired, although the prints do not establish the exact time he was there.
Oswald's Presence on Sixth Floor Approximately 35 Minutes Before the Assassination
Additional testimony linking Oswald with the point from which the shots were fired
was provided by the testimony of Charles Givens, who was the last known employee to see Oswald inside the building prior to the assassination.
During the morning of November 22, Givens was working with the floor-laying crew in the southwest section of the sixth floor.
At about 11:45 a.m. the floor-laying crew used both elevators to come down from the sixth floor.
The employees raced the elevators to the first floor. Givens saw Oswald standing at the gate on the fifth floor as the elevator went by.
Givens testified that after reaching the first floor, quote,
I discovered I left my cigarettes in my jacket pocket upstairs, and I took the elevator back upstairs to get my jacket with my cigarettes in it, end quote.
He saw Oswald, a clipboard in hand, walking from the southeast corner of the sixth floor toward the elevator.
Givens said to Oswald, quote, Boy are you going downstairs? It's near lunch time, end quote.
Oswald said, quote, No, sir. When you get downstairs, close the gate to the elevator, end quote.
Oswald was referring to the west elevator which operates by pushbutton and only with the gate closed. Givens said, "Okay,"
and rode down in the east elevator.
When he reached the first floor, the west elevator -- the one with the gate was not there.
Givens thought this was about 11:55 a.m.
None of the Depository employees is known to have seen Oswald again until after the shooting.
The significance of Givens' observation that Oswald was carrying his clipboard
became apparent on December 2, 1963, when an employee, Frankie Kaiser,
found a clipboard hidden by book cartons in the northwest corner of the sixth floor at the west wall a few feet from where the rifle had been found.
This clipboard had been made by Kaiser and had his name on it.
Kaiser identified it as the clipboard which Oswald had appropriated from him when Oswald came to work at the Depository.
Three invoices on this clipboard, each dated November 22, were for Scott-Foresman books, located on the first and sixth floors.
Oswald had not filled any of the three orders.
Eyewitness Identification of Assassin
Howard L. Brennan was an eyewitness to the shooting. As indicated previously the Commission considered his testimony as probative
in reaching the conclusion that the shots came from the sixth floor, southeast corner window of the Depository Building.
Brennan also testified that Lee Harvey Oswald,
whom he viewed in a police lineup on the night of the assassination, was the man he saw fire the shots from the sixth-floor window of the Depository Building.
When the shots were fired, Brennan was in an excellent position to observe anyone in the window. He was sitting on a concrete wall
on the southwest corner of Elm and Houston Streets, looking north at the Depository Building which was directly in front of him.
The window was approximately 120 feet away.
In the 6 to 8 minute period before the motorcade arrived, Brennan saw a man leave and return to the window, quote, a couple of times, end quote,
After hearing the first shot, which he thought was a motorcycle backfire, Brennan glanced up at the window. He testified that, quote,
this man I saw previously was aiming for his last shot. As it appeared to me he was standing up and resting against the left window sill, end quote.
Brennan saw the man fire the last shot and disappear from the window.
Within minutes of the assassination, Brennan described the man to the police.
This description most probably led to the radio alert sent to police cars at approximately 12:45 p.m., which described the suspect as white,
slender, weighing about one sixty-five pounds, about 5 foot 10 inches tall, and in his early thirties.
In his sworn statement to the police later that day,
Brennan described the man in similar terms, except that he gave the weight as between 165 and 175 pounds and the height was omitted.
In his testimony before the Commission, Brennan described the person he saw as, quote,
man in his early thirties, fair complexion, slender, but neat, neat slender, possible 5 foot 10
one-sixty to one-seventy pounds.
Oswald was 5 foot 9 inches, slender and 24 years old.
When arrested, he gave his weight as 140 pounds. On other occasions he gave weights of both 140 and 150 pounds.
The New Orleans police records of his arrest in August of 1963 show a weight of 136 pounds.
The autopsy report indicated an estimated weight of 150 pounds.
Brennan's description should also be compared with the eyewitness description broadcast over the Dallas police radio at 1:22 p.m.
of the man who shot Patrolman J. D. Tippit.
The suspect was described as, quote, a white male about 30, 5 foot 8, black hair, slender, end quote.
At 1:29 p.m. the police radio reported
that the description of the suspect in the Tippit shooting was similar to the description which had been given by Brennan in connection with the assassination.
Approximately 7 or 8 minutes later
the police radio reported that, quote, an eyeball witness, end quote, described the suspect in the Tippit shooting as, quote, a white male,
27, 5 foot 11, 165 pounds, black wavy hair, end quote,
As will be discussed fully below, the Commission has concluded that this suspect was Lee Harvey Oswald.
Although Brennan testified that the man in the window was standing when he fired the shots, most probably he was either sitting or kneeling.
The half-open window, the arrangement of the boxes, and the angle of the shots virtually preclude a standing position.
It is understandable, however, for Brennan to have believed that the man with the rifle was standing. A photograph of the building taken seconds after the assassination
shows three employees looking out of the fifth-floor window directly below the window from which the shots were fired.
Brennan testified that they were standing, which is their apparent position in the photograph.
But the testimony of these employees, together with photographs subsequently taken of them at the scene of the assassination,
establishes that they were either squatting or kneeling.
Since the window ledges in the Depository Building are lower than in most buildings,
a person squatting or kneeling exposes more of his body than would normally be the case.
From the street, this creates the impression that the person is standing.
Brennan could have seen enough of the body of a kneeling or squatting person to estimate his height.
Shortly after the assassination Brennan noticed
two of these employees leaving the building and immediately identified them as having been in the fifth-floor windows.
When the three employees appeared before the Commission, Brennan identified the two whom he saw leave the building.
The two men, Harold Norman and James Jarman, Jr., each confirmed that when they came out of the building,
they saw and heard Brennan describing what he had seen.
Jarman heard Brennan, quote, talking to this officer about that he had heard these shots and he had seen the barrel of the gun sticking out the window,
and he said that the shots came from inside the building, end quote.
During the evening of November 22, Brennan identified Oswald as the person in the lineup who bore the closest resemblance to the man in the window
but he said he was unable to make a positive identification.
Prior to the lineup,
Brennan had seen Oswald's picture on television, and he told the Commission that whether this affected his identification, quote, is something I do not know.
In an interview with FBI agents on December 17, 1963,
Brennan stated that he was sure that the person firing the rifle was Oswald.
In another interview with FBI agents on January 7, 1964,
Brennan appeared to revert to his earlier inability to make a positive identification,
but, in his testimony before the Commission, Brennan stated that his remarks of January 7 were intended by him merely as an accurate report
of what he said on November 22.
Brennan told the Commission that he could have made a positive identification in the lineup on November 22
but did not do so because he felt that the assassination was, quote, a Communist activity,
and I felt like there hadn't been more than one eyewitness, and if it got to be a known fact that I was an eyewitness, my family or I, either one, might not be safe.
When specifically asked before the Commission
whether or not he could positively identify the man he saw in the sixth-floor window as the same man he saw in the police station,
Brennan stated, quote, I could at that time -- I could, with all sincerity, identify him as being the same man, end quote.
Although the record indicates that Brennan was an accurate observer, he declined to make a positive identification of Oswald when he first saw him in the police lineup.
The Commission, therefore, does not base its conclusion concerning the identity of the assassin
on Brennan's subsequent certain identification of Lee Harvey Oswald as the man he saw fire the rifle.
Immediately after the assassination, however,
Brennan described to the police the man he saw in the window and then identified Oswald as the person who most nearly resembled the man he saw.
The Commission is satisfied that, at the least,
Brennan saw a man in the window who closely resembled Lee Harvey Oswald, and that Brennan believes the man he saw was in fact
Lee Harvey Oswald.
Two other witnesses were able to offer partial descriptions of a man they saw in the southeast corner window
of the sixth floor approximately 1 minute before the assassination, although neither witness saw the shots being fired.
Ronald Fischer and Robert Edwards were standing on the curb at the southwest corner of Elm and Houston Streets,
the same corner where Brennan was sitting on a concrete wall.
Fischer testified that about 10 or 15 seconds before the motorcade turned onto Houston Street from Main Street,
Edwards said, quote, Look at that guy there in that window, end quote,
Fischer looked up and watched the man in the window for 10 or 15 seconds and then started watching the motorcade, which came into view on Houston Street.
He said that the man held his attention until the motorcade came because the man, quote,
appeared uncomfortable for one, and secondly, he wasn't watching. he didn't look like he was watching for the parade.
He looked like he was looking down toward the Trinity River and the Triple Underpass down at the end -- toward the end of Elm Street. And
all the time I watched him, he never moved his head, he never -- he never moved anything. Just was there transfixed.
Fischer placed the man in the easternmost window on the south side of the Depository Building on either the fifth or the sixth floor.
He said that he could see the man from the middle of his chest to the top of his head, and that as he was facing the window the man was in the lower right-hand portion of the window
and, quote, seemed to be sitting a little forward, end quote,
The man was dressed in a light-colored, open-neck shirt which could have been either a sports shirt or a T-shirt,
and he had brown hair, a slender face and neck with light complexion, and looked to be 22 or 24 years old.
The person in the window was a white man and, quote, looked to me like he was looking straight at the Triple Underpass, end quote, down Elm Street.
Boxes and cases were stacked behind him.
Approximately 1 week after the assassination, according to Fisher, policemen showed him a picture of Oswald.
In his testimony he said, quote, I told them that that could have been the man.
That that could have been the man that I saw in the window in the School Book Depository Building, but that I was not sure, end quote.
Fischer described the man's hair as some shade of brown, quote, it wasn't dark, and it wasn't light, end quote.
On November 22, Fischer had apparently described the man as, quote, light-headed, end quote.
Fischer explained that he did not mean by the earlier statement that the man was blond, but rather that his hair was not black.
Robert Edwards said that, while looking at the south side of the Depository Building shortly before the motorcade,
he saw nothing of importance, quote, except maybe one individual who was up there in the corner room of the sixth floor which was crowded in among boxes, end quote.
He said that this was a white man about average in size, quote, possibly thin, end quote, and that he thought the man had light-brown hair.
Fischer and Edwards did not see the man clearly enough or long enough to identify him.
Their testimony is of probative value, however, because their limited description is consistent with that of the man who has been found by the Commission,
based on other evidence, to have fired the shots from the window.
Another person who saw the assassin as the shots were fired was Amos L. Euins, age 15,
who was one of the first witnesses to alert the police to the Depository as the source of the shots, as has been discussed in chapter 3.
Euins, who was on the southwest corner of Elm and Houston Streets testified that he could not describe the man he saw in the window.
According to Euins, however, as the man lowered his head in order to aim the rifle down Elm Street, he appeared to have a white bald spot, on his head.
Shortly after the assassination, Euins signed an affidavit describing the man as "white,"
but a radio reporter testified that Euins described the man to him as, quote, colored, end quote.
In his Commission testimony
Euins stated that he could not ascertain the man's race and that the statement in the affidavit was intended to refer only to the white spot on the man's head
and not to his race.
A Secret Service agent who spoke to Euins approximately 20 to 30 minutes after the assassination
confirmed that Euins could neither describe the man in the window nor indicate his race.
Accordingly, Euins' testimony is considered probative as to the source of the shots but is inconclusive as to the identity of the man in the window.
In evaluating the evidence that Oswald was at the southeast corner window of the sixth floor at the time of the shooting,
the Commission has considered the allegation that Oswald was photographed standing in front of the building when the shots were fired.
The picture which gave rise to these allegations was taken by Associated Press Photographer James W. Altgens,
who was standing on the south side of Elm Street between the Triple Underpass and the Depository Building.
As the motorcade started its descent down Elm Street., Altgens snapped a picture of the Presidential limousine with the entrance to the Depository Building in the background.
Just before snapping the picture Altgens heard a noise which sounded like the popping of a firecracker.
Investigation has established that Altgens' picture was taken approximately 2 seconds after the firing of the shot
which entered the back of the President's neck.
In the background of this picture were several employees watching the parade from the steps of the Depository Building.
One of these employees was alleged to resemble Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Commission has determined that the employee was in fact Billy Lovelady, who identified himself in the picture.
Standing alongside him were Buell Wesley Frazier and William Shelley, who also identified Lovelady.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 4. Oswald's Actions in Building After Assassination.
In considering whether Oswald was at the southeast corner window at the time the shots were fired,
the Commission has reviewed the testimony of witnesses who saw Oswald in the building within minutes after the assassination.
The Commission has found that Oswald's movements, as described by these witnesses,
are consistent with his having been at the window at 12:30 p.m.
The encounter in the lunchroom.
The first person to see Oswald after the assassination was Patrolman M. L. Baker of the Dallas Police Department.
Baker was riding a two-wheeled motorcycle behind the last press car of the motorcade.
As he turned the corner from Main onto Houston at a speed of about 5 to 10 miles per hour,
a strong wind blowing from the north almost unseated him.
At about this time he heard the first shot.
Having recently heard the sounds of rifles while on a hunting trip, Baker recognized the shots as that of a high-powered rifle; Quote,
it sounded high and I immediately kind of looked up,
and I had a feeling that it came from the building, either right in front of me [the Depository Building] or of the one across to the right of it, end quote,
He saw pigeons flutter upward. He was not certain, quote, but I am pretty sure they came from the building right on the northwest corner, end quote.
He heard two more shots spaced, quote, pretty well even to me.
end quote, After the third shot, he, quote, revved that motorcycle up, end quote,
drove to the northwest corner of Elm and Houston, and parked approximately 10 feet from the traffic signal.
As he was parking he noted that people were, quote, falling, and they were rolling around down there grabbing their children, end quote, and rushing about.
A woman screamed, quote, Oh, they have shot that man, they have shot that man, end quote.
Baker, quote, had it in mind that the shots came from the top of this building here, end quote, so he ran straight to the entrance of the Depository Building.
Baker testified that he entered the lobby of the building and, quote, spoke out and asked where the stairs or elevator was
and this man, Mr. Truly, spoke up and says, it seems to me like he says,
I am a building manager. Follow me, officer, and I will show you, end quote.
Baker and building superintendent Roy Truly went through a second set of doors and stopped at a swinging door where Baker bumped into Truly's back.
They went through the swinging door and continued at, quote, a good trot, end quote,
to the northwest corner of the floor where Truly hoped to find one of the two freight elevators.
Neither elevator was there.
Truly pushed the button for the west elevator which operates automatically if the gate is closed.
He shouted twice, quote, Turn loose the elevator, end quote,
When the elevator failed to come, Baker said, quote, let's take the stairs, end quote, and he followed Truly up the stairway, which is to the west of the elevator.
The stairway is located in the northwest corner of the Depository Building.
The stairs from one floor to the next are "L-shaped," with both legs of the "L" approximately the same length.
Because the stairway itself is enclosed, neither Baker nor Truly could see anything on the second-floor hallway until they reached the landing at the top of the stairs.
On the second-floor landing there is a small open area with a door at the east end.
This door leads into a small vestibule, and another door leads from the vestibule into the second-floor lunchroom.
The lunchroom door is usually open, but the first door is kept shut by a closing mechanism on the door.
This vestibule door is solid except for a small glass window in the upper part of the door.
As Baker reached the second floor, he was about 20 feet from the vestibule door. He intended to continue around to his left toward the stairway going up
but through the window in the door he caught a fleeting glimpse of a man walking in the vestibule toward the lunchroom.
Since the vestibule door is only a few feet from the lunchroom door, the man must have entered the vestibule only a second or two before Baker arrived at the top of the stairwell.
Yet he must have entered the vestibule door before Truly reached the top of the stairwell, since Truly did not see him.
If the man had passed from the vestibule into the lunchroom, Baker could not have seen him.
Baker said, quote, He [Truly] had already started around the bend to come to the next elevator going up,
I was coming out this one on the second floor, and I don't know, I was kind of sweeping this area as I come up, I was looking from right to left
and as I got to this door here I caught a glimpse of this man, just, you know, a sudden glimpse. And it looked to me like he was going away from me.
I can't say whether he had gone on through that door [the lunchroom door] or not.
All I did was catch a glance at him, and evidently he was -- this door might have been, you know, closing and almost shut at that time, end quote.
With his revolver drawn, Baker opened the vestibule door and ran into the vestibule.
He saw a man walking away from him in the lunchroom.
Baker stopped at the door of the lunchroom and commanded, quote, Come here, end quote.
The man turned and walked back toward Baker.
He had been proceeding toward the rear of the lunchroom.
Along a side wall of the lunchroom was a soft drink rending machine, but at that time the man had nothing in his hands.
Meanwhile, Truly had run up several steps toward the third floor.
Missing Baker, he came back to find the officer in the doorway to the lunchroom facing Lee Harvey Oswald.
Baker turned to Truly and said, quote, Do you know this man, does he work here? end quote.
Truly replied, "Yes."
Baker stated later that the man did not seem to be out of breath; he seemed calm. Quote, He never did say a word or nothing.
In fact, he didn't change his expression one bit, end quote.
Truly said of Oswald: quote, He didn't seem to be excited or overly afraid or anything. He might have been a bit startled, like I might have been if somebody confronted me.
But I cannot recall any change in expression of any kind on his face, end quote.
Truly thought that the officer's gun at that time appeared to be almost touching the middle portion of Oswald's body.
Truly also noted at this time that Oswald's hands were empty.
In an effort to determine whether Oswald could have descended to the lunchroom
from the sixth floor by the time Baker and Truly arrived, Commission counsel asked Baker and Truly to repeat their movements from the time of the shot
until Baker came upon Oswald in the lunchroom.
Baker placed himself on a motorcycle about 200 feet from the corner of Elm and Houston Streets where he said he heard the shots.
Truly stood in front of the building.
At a given signal, they reenacted the event. Baker's movements were timed with a stopwatch.
On the first test, the elapsed time between the simulated first shot and Baker's arrival on the second-floor stair landing
was 1 minute and 30 seconds.
The second test run required 1 minute and 15 seconds.
A test was also conducted to determine the time required to walk from the southeast corner of the sixth floor to the second-floor lunchroom by stairway.
Special Agent John Howlett of the Secret Service carried a rifle from the southeast corner of the sixth floor along the east aisle to the northeast corner.
He placed the rifle on the floor near the site where Oswald's rifle was actually found after the shooting.
Then Howlett walked down the stairway to the second-floor landing and entered the lunchroom.
The first test, run at normal walking pace, required 1 minute, 18 seconds;
the second test, at a "fast walk" took 1 minute, 14 seconds.
The second test followed immediately after the first.
The only interval was the time necessary to ride in the elevator from the second to the sixth floor and walk back to the southeast corner.
Howlett was not short winded at the end of either test run.
The minimum time required by Baker to park his motorcycle and reach the second-floor lunchroom was within 3 seconds of the time needed to walk
from the southeast corner of the sixth floor down the stairway to the lunchroom.
The time actually required for Baker and Truly to reach the second floor on November 22 was probably longer than in the test runs. For example,
Baker required 15 seconds after the simulated shot to ride his motorcycle 180 to 200 feet,
park it, and run 45 feet to the building.
No allowance was made for the special conditions which existed on the day of the assassination
possible delayed reaction to the shot, jostling with the crowd of people on the steps and scanning the area along Elm Street and the parkway.
Baker said, quote, We simulated the shots and by the time we got there, we did everything that I did that day,
and this would be the minimum, because I am sure that I, you know, it took me a little longer, end quote,
On the basis of this time test, therefore,
the Commission concluded that Oswald could have fired the shots and still have been present in the second-floor lunchroom when seen by Baker and Truly.
That Oswald descended by stairway from the sixth floor to the second-floor lunchroom
is consistent with the movements of the two elevators, which would have provided the other possible means of descent.
When Truly, accompanied by Baker, ran to the rear of the first floor,
he was certain that both elevators, which occupy the same shaft, were on the fifth floor.
Baker, not realizing that there were two elevators, thought that only one elevator was in the shaft and that it was two or three floors above the second floor.
In the few seconds which elapsed while Baker and Truly ran from the first to the second floor,
neither of these slow elevators could have descended from the fifth to the second floor. Furthermore, no elevator was at the second floor when they arrived there.
Truly and Baker continued up the stairs after the encounter with Oswald in the lunchroom.
There was no elevator on the third or fourth floor.
The east elevator was on the fifth floor when they arrived; the west elevator was not.
They took the east elevator to the seventh floor and ran up a stairway to the roof where they searched for several minutes.
Jack Dougherty, an employee working on the fifth floor,
testified that he took the west elevator to the first floor after hearing a noise which sounded like a backfire.
Eddie Piper, the janitor, told Dougherty that the President had been shot,
but in his testimony Piper did not mention either seeing or talking with Dougherty during these moments of excitement.
Both Dougherty and Piper were confused witnesses. They had no exact memory of the events of that afternoon.
Truly was probably correct in stating that the west elevator was on the fifth floor when he looked up the elevator shaft from the first floor.
The west elevator was not on the fifth floor when Baker and Truly reached that floor,
probably because Jack Dougherty took it to the first floor while Baker and Truly were running up the stairs or in the lunchroom with Oswald.
Neither elevator could have been used by Oswald as a means of descent.
Oswald's use of the stairway is consistent with the testimony of other employees in the building.
Three employees -- James Jarman, Jr.,
Harold Norman, and Bonnie Ray Williams -- were watching the parade from the fifth floor, directly below the window from which the shots were fired.
They rushed to the west windows after the shots were fired and remained there
until after they saw Patrolman Baker's white helmet on the fifth floor moving toward the elevator.
While they were at the west windows their view of the stairwell was completely blocked by shelves and boxes.
This is the period during which Oswald would have descended the stairs. In all likelihood
Dougherty took the elevator down from the fifth floor after Jarman, Norman, and Williams ran to the west windows and were deciding what to do.
None of these three men saw Dougherty, probably because of the anxiety of the moment and because of the books which may have blocked the view.
Neither Jarman, Norman, Williams, or Dougherty saw Oswald.
Victoria Adams, who worked on the fourth floor of the Depository Building,
claimed that within about 1 minute following the shots she ran from a window on the south side of the fourth floor,
down the rear stairs to the first floor, where she encountered two Depository employees -- William Shelley and Billy Lovelady.
If her estimate of time is correct, she reached the bottom of the stairs before Truly and Baker started up,
and she must have run down the stairs ahead of Oswald and would probably have seen or heard him.
Actually she noticed no one on the back stairs. If she descended from the fourth to the first floor as fast as she claimed in her testimony,
she would have seen Baker or Truly on the first floor or on the stairs, unless they were already in the second-floor lunchroom talking to Oswald.
When she reached the first floor, she actually saw Shelley and Lovelady slightly east of the east elevator.
Shelley and Lovelady, however, have testified
that they were watching the parade from the top step of the building entrance when Gloria Calverly, who works in the Depository Building,
ran up and said that the President had been shot.
Lovelady and Shelley moved out into the street.
About this time Shelley saw Truly and Patrolman Baker go into the building
Shelley and Lovelady, at a fast walk or trot, turned west into the railroad yards and then to the west side of the Depository Building.
They reentered the building by the rear door several minutes after Baker and Truly rushed through the front entrance.
On entering, Lovelady saw a girl on the first floor who he believes was Victoria Adams.
If Miss Adams accurately recalled meeting Shelley and Lovelady when she reached the bottom of the stairs,
then her estimate of the time when she descended from the fourth floor is incorrect,
and she actually came down the stairs several minutes after Oswald and after Truly and Baker as well.
Oswald's departure from building.
Within a minute after Baker and Truly left Oswald in the lunchroom, Mrs. R. A. Reid, clerical supervisor for the Texas School Book Depository,
saw him walk through the clerical office on the second floor toward the door leading to the front stairway.
Mrs. Reid had watched the parade from the sidewalk in front of the building with Truly and Mr. O. V. Campbell, vice president of the Depository.
She testified that she heard three shots which she thought came from the building.
She ran inside and up the front stairs into the large open office reserved for clerical employees.
As she approached her desk, she saw Oswald.
He was walking into the office from the back hallway,
carrying a full bottle of Coca-Cola in his hand, presumably purchased after the encounter with Baker and Truly.
As Oswald passed Mrs. Reid she said, quote, Oh, the President has been shot, but maybe they didn't hit him, end quote.
Oswald mumbled something and walked by. She paid no more attention to him.
The only exit from the office in the direction Oswald was moving was through the door to the front stairway.
Mrs. Reid testified that when she saw Oswald, he was wearing a T-shirt and no jacket.
When he left home that morning, Marina Oswald, who was still in bed, suggested that he wear a jacket.
A blue jacket, later identified by Marina Oswald as her husband's, was subsequently found in the building, apparently left behind by Oswald.
Mrs. Reid believes that she returned to her desk from the street about 2 minutes after the shooting.
Reconstructing her movements, Mrs. Reid ran the distance three times and was timed in 2 minutes by stopwatch.
The reconstruction was the minimum time. Accordingly, she probably met Oswald at about 12:32,
approximately 30 to 45 seconds after Oswald's lunchroom encounter with Baker and Truly.
After leaving Mrs. Reid in the front office, Oswald could have gone down the stairs and out the front door by 12:33 p.m.
3 minutes after the shooting.
At that time the building had not yet been sealed off by the police.
While it was difficult to determine exactly when the police sealed off the building,
the earliest estimates would still have permitted Oswald to leave the building by 12:33.
One of the police officers assigned to the corner of Elm and Houston Streets for the Presidential motorcade, W. E. Barnett,
testified that immediately after the shots he went to the rear of the building to check the fire escape.
He then returned to the corner of Elm and Houston where he met a sergeant who instructed him to find out the name of the building.
Barnett ran to the building, noted its name, and then returned to the corner.
There he was met by a construction worker -- in all likelihood Howard Brennan, who was wearing his work helmet.
This worker told Barnett that the shots had been fired from a window in the Depository Building,
where upon Barnett posted himself at the front door to make certain that no one left the building.
The sergeant did the same thing at the rear of the building.
Barnett estimated that approximately 3 minutes elapsed between the time he heard the last of the shots and the time he started guarding the front door.
According to Barnett, quote, there were people going in and out, end quote, during this period.
Sgt. D. V. Harkness of the Dallas police
said that to his knowledge the building was not sealed off at 12:36 p.m. when he called in on police radio
that a witness (Amos Euins) had seen shots fired from a window of the building.
At that time, Inspector Herbert V. Sawyer's car was parked in front of the building.
Harkness did not know whether or not two officers with Sawyer were guarding the doors.
At 12:34 p.m. Sawyer heard a call over the police radio that the shots had come from the Depository Building.
He then entered the building and took the front passenger elevator as far as it would go -- the fourth floor.
After inspecting this floor, Sawyer returned to the street about 3 minutes after he entered the building.
After he returned to the street he directed Sergeant Harkness to station two patrolmen at the front door and not let anyone in or out;
he also directed that the back door be sealed off.
This was no earlier than 12:37 p.m. and may have been later.
Special Agent Forrest V. Sorrels of the Secret Service, who had been in the motorcade,
testified that after driving to Parkland Hospital, he returned to the Depository Building about 20 minutes after the shooting,
found no police officers at the rear door and was able to enter through this door without identifying himself.
Although Oswald probably left the building at about 12:33 p.m., his absence was not noticed until at least one-half hour later.
Truly, who had returned with Patrolman Baker from the roof, saw the police questioning the warehouse employees.
Approximately 15 men worked in the warehouse and Truly noticed that Oswald was not among those being questioned.
Satisfying himself that Oswald was missing, Truly obtained Oswald's address, phone number, and description from his employment application card.
The address listed was for the Paine home in Irving.
Truly gave this information to Captain Fritz who was on the sixth floor at the time.
Truly estimated that he gave this information to Fritz about 15 or 20 minutes after the shots,
but it was probably no earlier than 1:22 p.m., the time when the rifle was found.
Fritz believed that he learned of Oswald's absence after the rifle was found.
The fact that Truly found Fritz in the northwest corner of the floor, near the point where the rifle was found, supports Fritz' recollection.
Fingerprint and palmprint evidence establishes that Oswald handled two of the four cartons next to the window
and also handled a paper bag which was found near the cartons.
Oswald was seen in the vicinity of the southeast corner of the sixth floor approximately 35 minutes before the assassination
and no one could be found who saw Oswald anywhere else in the building until after the shooting.
An eyewitness to the shooting immediately provided a description of the man in the window which was similar to Oswald's actual appearance.
This witness identified Oswald in a lineup as the man most nearly resembling the man he saw and later identified Oswald as the man he observed.
Oswald's known actions in the building immediately after the assassination are consistent with his having been at the southeast corner window of the sixth floor
at 12:30 p.m
On the basis of these findings the Commission has concluded that Oswald, at the time of the assassination,
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 5.
The Killing of Patrolman J. D. Tippit
After leaving the Depository Building at approximately 12:33 p.m., Lee Harvey Oswald proceeded to his roominghouse by bus and taxi.
He arrived at approximately 1 p.m. and left a few minutes later.
At about 1:16 p.m., a Dallas police officer, J. D. Tippit, was shot less than 1 mile from Oswald's roominghouse.
In deciding whether Oswald killed Patrolman Tippit the Commission considered the following:
(1) positive identification of the killer by two eyewitnesses who saw the shooting
and seven eyewitnesses who heard the shots and saw the gunman flee the scene with the revolver in his hand,
(2) testimony of firearms identification experts establishing the identity of the murder weapon,
(3) evidence establishing the ownership of the murder weapon,
(4) evidence establishing the ownership of a zipper jacket
found along the path of flight taken by the gunman from the scene of the shooting to the place of arrest.
Oswald's Movements After Leaving Depository Building
According to the reconstruction of time and events which the Commission found most credible,
Lee Harvey Oswald left the building approximately 3 minutes after the assassination.
He probably walked east on Elm Street for seven blocks to the corner of Elm and Murphy
where he boarded a bus which was heading back in the direction of the Depository Building, on its way to the Oak Cliff section of Dallas.
When Oswald was apprehended, a bus transfer marked for the Lakewood-Marsalis route was found in his shirt pocket.
The transfer was dated "Friday November 22, '63" and was punched in two places by the bus driver.
On the basis of this punchmark, which was distinctive to each Dallas driver,
the transfer was conclusively identified as having been issued by Cecil J. McWatters, a busdriver for the Dallas Transit Co.
On the basis of the date and time on the transfer, McWatters was able to testify that the transfer had been issued by him
on a trip which passed a check point at St. Paul and Elm Streets at 12:36 p.m., November 22, 1963.
McWatters was sure that he left the checkpoint on time
and he estimated that it took him 3 to 4 minutes to drive three blocks west from the checkpoint to Field Street,
which he reached at about 12:40 p.m.
McWatters' recollection is that he issued this transfer to a man who entered his bus just beyond Field Street,
where a man beat on the front door of the bus, boarded it and paid his fare.
About two blocks later, a woman asked to get off to make a 1 o'clock train at Union Station
and requested a transfer which she might use if she got through the traffic.
So I gave her a transfer and opened the door and she was going out the gentleman I had picked up about two blocks [back]
asked for a transfer and got off at the same place in the middle of the block where the lady did.
It was the intersection near Lamar Street, it was near Poydras and Lamar Street.
The man was on the bus approximately 4 minutes.
At about 6:30 p.m. on the day of the assassination, McWatters viewed four men in a police lineup.
He picked Oswald from the lineup as the man who had boarded the bus at the, quote, lower end of town on Elm around Houston, end quote,
and who, during the ride south on Marsalis, had an argument with a woman passenger.
In his Commission testimony, McWatters said he had been in error and that a teenager named Milton Jones was the passenger he had in mind.
In a later interview, Jones confirmed that he had exchanged words with a woman passenger on the bus during the ride south on Marsalis.
McWatters also remembered that a man received a transfer at Lamar and Elm Streets and that a man in the lineup was about the size of this man.
However, McWatters' recollection alone was too vague to be a basis for placing Oswald on the bus.
Riding on the bus was an elderly woman, Mary Bledsoe, who confirmed the mute evidence of the transfer.
Oswald had rented a room from Mrs. Bledsoe about 6 weeks before, on October 7, but she had asked him to leave at the end of a week.
Mrs. Bledsoe told him, quote, I am not going to rent to you any more, end quote,
She testified, quote, I didn't like his attitude. There was just something about him I didn't like or want him. Just didn't want him around me, end quote,
On November 22, Mrs. Bledsoe came downtown to watch the Presidential motorcade.
She boarded the Marsalis bus at St. Paul and Elm Streets to return home. She testified further, quote,
And, after we got past Akard, at Murphy -- I figured it out. Let's see. I don't know for sure.
Oswald got on. He looks like a maniac. His sleeve was out here. His shirt was undone.
Was a hole in it, hole, and he was dirty, and I didn't look at him. I didn't want to know I even seen him.
he looked so bad in his face, and his face was so distorted. Hole in his sleeve right here.
End quote. As Mrs. Bledsoe said these words, she pointed to her right elbow.
When Oswald was arrested in the Texas Theatre, he was wearing a brown sport shirt with a hole in the right sleeve at the elbow.
Mrs. Bledsoe identified the shirt as the one Oswald was wearing and she stated she was certain that it was Oswald who boarded the bus.
Mrs. Bledsoe recalled that Oswald sat halfway to the rear of the bus which moved slowly and intermittently as traffic became heavy.
She heard a passing motorist tell the driver that the President had been shot.
People on the bus began talking about it. As the bus neared Lamar Street, Oswald left the bus and disappeared into the crowd.
The Marsalis bus which Oswald boarded traveled a route west on Elm,
south on Houston, and southwest across the Houston viaduct to service the Oak Cliff area along Marsalis.
A Beckley bus which also served the Oak Cliff area,
followed the same route as the Marsalis bus through downtown Dallas, except that it continued west on Elm,
across Houston in front of the Depository Building, past the Triple Underpass into west Dallas, and south on Beckley.
Marsalis Street is seven blocks from Beckley.
Oswald lived at 1026 North Beckley.
He could not reach his roominghouse on the Marsalis bus, but the Beckley bus stopped across the street.
According to McWatters, the Beckley bus was behind the Marsalis bus, but he did not actually see it.
Both buses stopped within one block of the Depository Building.
Instead of waiting there, Oswald apparently went as far away as he could and boarded the first Oak Cliff bus which came along
rather than wait for one which stopped across the street from his roominghouse.
In a reconstruction of this bus trip, agents of the Secret Service and the FBI walked the seven blocks from the front entrance of the Depository Building
to Murphy and Elm three times, averaging 6.5 minutes for the three trips.
A bus moving through heavy traffic on Elm from Murphy to Lamar was timed at 4 minutes.
If Oswald left the Depository Building at 12:33 p.m.,
walked seven blocks directly to Murphy and Elm, and boarded a bus almost immediately,
he would have boarded the bus at approximately 12:40 p.m. and left it at approximately 12:44 p.m.
Roger D. Craig, a deputy sheriff of Dallas County,
claimed that about 15 minutes after the assassination he saw a man, whom he later identified as Oswald,
coming from the direction of the Depository Building and running down the hill north of Elm Street
toward a light-colored Rambler station wagon, which was moving slowly along Elm toward the underpass:
The station wagon stopped to pick up the man and then drove off.
Craig testified that later in the afternoon he saw Oswald in the police interrogation room
and told Captain Fritz that Oswald was the man he saw.
Craig also claimed that when Fritz pointed out to Oswald that Craig had identified him,
Oswald rose from his chair, looked directly at Fritz, and said, quote, Everybody will know who I am now, end quote,
The Commission could not accept important elements of Craig's testimony.
Captain Fritz stated that a deputy sheriff whom he could not identify did ask to see him that afternoon
and told him a similar story to Craig's.
Fritz did not bring him into his office to identify Oswald but turned him over to Lieutenant Baker for questioning.
If Craig saw Oswald that afternoon, he saw him through the glass windows of the office.
And neither Captain Fritz nor any other officer can remember that Oswald dramatically arose from his chair
and said, quote, Everybody will know who I am now, end quote.
If Oswald had made such a statement, Captain Fritz and others present would probably have remembered it.
Craig may have seen a person enter a white Rambler station wagon 15 or 20 minutes after the shooting and travel west on Elm Street
but the Commission concluded that this man was not Lee Harvey Oswald,
because of the overwhelming evidence that Oswald was far away from the building by that time.
The taxicab ride.
William Whaley, a taxicab driver, told his employer on Saturday morning, November 23
that he recognized Oswald from a newspaper photograph as a man whom he had driven to the Oak Cliff area the day before.
Notified of Whaley's statement, the police brought him to the police station that afternoon.
He was taken to the lineup room where, according to Whaley, five young teenagers, all handcuffed together, were displayed with Oswald.
He testified that Oswald looked older than the other boys.
The police asked him whether he could pick out his passenger from the lineup.
Whaley picked Oswald.
He said, quote,
You could have picked him out without identifying him by just listening to him.
because he was bawling out the policeman, telling them it wasn't right to put him in line with these teenagers and all of that
and they asked me which one and I told them. It was him all right, the same man. He showed no respect for the policemen,
he told them what he thought about them. They knew what they were doing and they were trying to railroad him and he wanted his lawyer.
Whaley believes that Oswald's conduct did not aid him in his identification, quote, because I knew he was the right one as soon as I saw him.
Whaley's memory of the lineup is inaccurate. There were four men altogether, not six men, in the lineup with Oswald.
Whaley said that Oswald was the man under No. 2.
Actually Oswald was under No. 3.
Only two of the men in the lineup with Oswald were teenagers: John T. Horn, aged 18, was No. 1;
David Knapp, aged 18, was No. 2;
Lee Oswald was No. 3;
and Daniel Lujan, aged 26, was No. 4.
When he first testified before the Commission,
Whaley displayed a trip manifest which showed a 12 o'clock trip from Travis Hotel to the Continental bus station,
unloaded at 12:15 p.m.,
a 12:15 p.m. pickup at Continental to Greyhound, unloaded at 12:30 p.m.,
and a pickup from Greyhound (bus station) at 12:30 p.m.,
unloaded at 500 North Beckley at 12:45 p.m.
Whaley testified that he did not keep an accurate time record of his trips but recorded them by the quarter hour,
and that sometimes he made his entry right after a trip while at other times he waited to record three or four trips.
As he unloaded his Continental bus station passenger in front of Greyhound, he started to get out to buy a package of cigarettes.
He saw a man walking south on Lamar from Commerce.
The man was dressed in faded blue color khaki work clothes, a brown shirt, and some kind of work jacket that almost matched his pants.
The man asked, quote, May I have the cab?, end quote, and got into the front seat.
Whaley described the ensuing events as follows, quote,
And about that time an old lady, I think she was an old lady, I don't remember nothing but her sticking her head down past him in the door and said,
Driver, will you call me a cab down here? She had seen him get this cab and she wanted one, too,
and he opened the door a little bit like he was going to get out and he said, "I will let you have this one," and she says, "No, the driver can call me one."
I asked him where he wanted to go. And he said, "500 North Beckley. Well, I started up,
I started to that address, and the police cars, the sirens was going, running crisscrossing everywhere, just a big uproar in that end of town and I said,
What the hell. I wonder what the hell is the uproar?
And he never said anything. So I figured he was one of these people that don't like to talk so I never said any more to him.
But when I got pretty close to 500 block at Neches and North Beckley which is the 500 block, he said, "This will do fine," and I pulled over to the curb right there.
He gave me a dollar bill, the trip was 95 cents.
He gave me a dollar bill and didn't say anything, just got out and closed the door and walked around the front of the cab over to the other side of the street
[east side of the street]. Of course, the traffic was moving through there and I put it in gear and moved on, that is the last I saw of him.
Whaley was somewhat imprecise as to where he unloaded his passenger.
He marked what, he thought was the intersection of Neches and Beckley on a map of Dallas with a large "X."
He said, quote, Yes, sir; that is right, because that is the 500 block of North Beckley, end quote,
However, Neches and Beckley do not intersect.
Neches is within one-half block of the roominghouse at 1026 North Beckley where Oswald was living.
The 500 block of North Beckley is five blocks south of the roominghouse.
After a review of these inconsistencies in his testimony before the Commission, Whaley was interviewed again in Dallas.
The route of the taxicab was retraced under the direction of Whaley.
He directed the driver of the car to a point 20 feet north of the northwest corner of the intersection of Beckley and Neely
the point at which he said his passenger alighted.
This was the 700 block of North Beckley
The elapsed time of the reconstructed run from the Greyhound Bus Station to Neely and Beckley was 5 minutes and 30 seconds by stopwatch.
The walk from Beckley and Neely to 1026 North Beckley was timed by Commission counsel at 5 minutes and 45 seconds.
Whaley testified that Oswald was wearing either the gray zippered jacket or the heavy blue jacket.
He was in error, however.
Oswald could not possibly have been wearing the blue jacket during the trip with Whaley, since it was found in the "domino" room of the Depository late in November.
Moreover, Mrs. Bledsoe saw Oswald in the bus without a jacket and wearing a shirt with a hole at the elbow.
On the other hand, Whaley identified Commission Exhibit No. 150 (the shirt taken from Oswald upon arrest) as the shirt his passenger was wearing.
He also stated he saw a silver identification bracelet on his passenger's left wrist.
Oswald was wearing such a bracelet when he was arrested.
On November 22, Oswald told Captain Fritz that he rode a bus to a stop near his home and then walked to his roominghouse.
When queried the following morning concerning a bus transfer found in his possession at the time of his arrest, he admitted receiving it.
And when interrogated about a cab ride, Oswald also admitted that he left the slow-moving bus and took a cab to his roominghouse.
The Greyhound Bus Station at Lamar and Jackson Streets, where Oswald entered Whaley's cab,
is three to four short blocks south of Lamar and Elm. If Oswald left the bus at 12:44 p.m.
and walked directly to the terminal, he would have entered the cab at 12:47 or 12:48 p.m.
If the cab ride was approximately 6 minutes, as was the reconstructed ride,
he would have reached his destination at approximately 12:54 p.m.
If he was discharged at Neely and Beckley and walked directly to his roominghouse,
he would have arrived there about 12:59 to 1 p.m.
From the 500 block of North Beckley, the walk would be a few minutes longer,
but in either event he would have been in the roominghouse at about 1 p.m.
This is the approximate time he entered the roominghouse, according to Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper there.
Arrival and departure from roominghouse.
Earlene Roberts, housekeeper for Mrs. A. C. Johnson at 1026 North Beckley
knew Lee Harvey Oswald under the alias of O. H. Lee.
She first saw him the day he rented a room at that address on October 14, 1963.
He signed his name as O. H. Lee on the roominghouse register.
Mrs. Roberts testified that on Thursday, November 21, Oswald did not come home.
On Friday, November 22, about 1 p.m., he entered the house in unusual haste.
She recalled that it was subsequent to the time the President had been shot.
After a friend had called and told her, "President Kennedy has been shot," she turned on the television.
When Oswald came in she said, quote, Oh, you are in a hurry, end quote, but Oswald did not respond.
He hurried to his room and stayed no longer than 3 or 4 minutes.
Oswald had entered the house in his shirt sleeves, but when he left, he was zipping up a jacket.
Mrs. Roberts saw him a few seconds later standing near the bus stop in front of the house on the east side of Beckley.
Oswald was next seen about nine-tenths of a mile away
at the southeast corner of 10th Street and Patton Avenue, moments before the Tippit shooting.
If Oswald left his roominghouse shortly after 1 p.m. and walked at a brisk pace,
he would have reached 10th and Patton shortly after 1:15 p.m.
Tippit's murder was recorded on the police radio tape at about 1:16 p.m.
Description of Shooting
Patrolman J. D. Tippit joined the Dallas Police Department in July 1952.
He was described by Chief Curry as having the reputation of being "a very fine, dedicated officer."
Tippit patroled district No. 78 in the Oak Cliff area of Dallas during daylight hours.
He drove a police car painted distinctive colors with No. 10 prominently displayed on each side.
Tippit rode alone, as only one man was normally assigned to a patrol car in residential areas during daylight shifts.
At about 12:44 p.m. on November 22,
the radio dispatcher on channel 1 ordered all downtown patrol squads to report to Elm and Houston, code 3 (emergency).
At 12:45 p.m. the dispatcher ordered No. 78 (Tippit) to, quote, move into central Oak Cliff area, end quote.
At 12:54 p.m., Tippit reported that he was in the central Oak Cliff area at Lancaster and Eighth.
The dispatcher ordered Tippit to be, quote, at large for any emergency that comes in, end quote.
According to Chief Curry, Tippit was free to patrol the central Oak Cliff area.
Tippit must have heard the description of the suspect wanted for the President's shooting; it was broadcast over channel 1 at 12:45 p.m.,
again at 12:48 p.m., and again at 12:55 p.m.
The suspect was described as a, quote,
white male, approximately 30, slender build, height 5 foot 10 inches, weight 165 pounds, end quote.
A similar description was given on channel 2 at 12:45 p.m.
At approximately 1:15 p.m., Tippit, who was cruising east on 10th Street,
passed the intersection of 10th and Patton, about eight blocks from where he had reported at 12:54 p.m.
About 100 feet past the intersection Tippit stopped a man walking east along the south side of Patton.
The man's general description was similar to the one broadcast over the police radio.
Tippit stopped the man and called him to his car.
He approached the car and apparently exchanged words with Tippit through the right front or vent window.
Tippit got out and started to walk around the front of the car
As Tippit reached the left front wheel the man pulled out a revolver and fired several shots.
Four bullets hit Tippit and killed him instantly.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 6.
Eyewitnesses
At least 12 persons saw the man with the revolver in the vicinity of the Tippit crime scene at or immediately after the shooting.
By the evening of November 22, five of them had identified Lee Harvey Oswald in police lineups as the man they saw.
A sixth did so the next day.
Three others subsequently identified Oswald from a photograph.
Two witnesses testified that Oswald resembled the man they had seen.
One witness felt he was too distant from the gunman to make a positive identification.
A taxi driver, William Scoggins,
was eating lunch in his cab which was parked on Patton facing the southeast corner of 10th Street and Patton Avenue a few feet to the north.
A police car moving east on 10th at about 10 or 12 miles an hour passed in front of his cab.
About 100 feet from the corner the police car pulled up alongside a man on the sidewalk. This man, dressed in a light-colored jacket, approached the car.
Scoggins lost sight of him behind some shrubbery on the southeast corner lot,
but he saw the policeman leave the car, heard three or four shots, and then saw the policeman fall.
Scoggins hurriedly left his seat and hid behind the cab as the man came back toward the corner with gun in hand.
The man cut across the yard through some bushes, passed within 12 feet of Scoggins, and ran south on Patton.
Scoggins saw him and heard him mutter either "Poor damn cop" or "Poor dumb cop."
The next day Scoggins viewed a lineup of four persons and identified Oswald as the man whom he had seen the day before at 10th and Patton.
In his testimony before the Commission,
Scoggins stated that he thought he had seen a picture of Oswald in the newspapers prior to the lineup identification on Saturday.
He had not seen Oswald on television and had not been shown any photographs of Oswald by the police.
Another witness, Domingo Benavides, was driving a pickup truck west on 10th Street.
As he crossed the intersection a block east of 10th and Patton, he saw a policeman standing by the left door of the police car parked along the south side of 10th.
Benavides saw a man standing at the right side of the parked police car. He then heard three shots and saw the policeman fall to the ground.
By this time the pickup truck was across the street and about 25 feet from the police car.
Benavides stopped and waited in the truck until the gunman ran to the corner.
He saw him empty the gun and throw the shells into some bushes on the southeast corner lot.
It was Benavides, using Tippit's car radio, who first reported the killing of Patrolman Tippit at about 1:16 p.m.:
quote, We've had a shooting out here, end quote,
He found two empty shells in the bushes and gave them to Patrolman J. M. Poe who arrived on the scene shortly after the shooting.
Benavides never saw Oswald after the arrest.
When questioned by police officers on the evening of November 22, Benavides told them that he did not think that he could identify the man who fired the shots.
As a result, they did not take him to the police station.
He testified that the picture of Oswald which he saw later on television bore a resemblance to the man who shot Officer Tippit.
Just prior to the shooting, Mrs. Helen Markham, a waitress in downtown Dallas, was about to cross 10th Street at Patton.
As she waited on the northwest corner of the intersection for traffic to pass, she noticed a young man as he was, quote, almost ready to get up on the curb, end quote.
at the southeast corner of the intersection, approximately 50 feet away.
The man continued along 10th Street. Mrs. Markham saw a police car slowly approach the man from the rear and stop alongside of him.
She saw the man come to the right window of the police car. As he talked, he leaned on the ledge of the right window with his arms.
The man appeared to step back as the policeman, quote, calmly opened the car door, end quote, and very slowly got out and walked toward the front of the car.
The man pulled a gun. Mrs. Markham heard three shots and saw the policeman fall to the ground near the left front wheel.
She raised her hands to her eyes as the man started to walk back toward Patton.
She peered through her fingers, lowered her hands, and saw the man doing something with his gun. Quote,
He was just fooling with it. I didn't know what he was doing. I was afraid he was fixing to kill me. End quote.
The man, quote, in kind of a little trot, end quote, headed down Patton toward Jefferson Boulevard, a block away.
Mrs. Markham then ran to Officer Tippit's side and saw him lying in a pool of blood.
Helen Markham was screaming as she leaned over the body.
A few minutes later she described the gunman to a policeman.
Her description and that of other eyewitnesses led to the police broadcast at 1:22 p.m.
describing the slayer as, quote, about 30, 5 foot 8 inches, black hair, slender, end quote.
At about 4:30 p.m., Mrs. Markham,
who had been greatly upset by her experience, was able to view a lineup of four men handcuffed together at the police station.
She identified Lee Harvey Oswald as the man who shot the policeman.
Detective L. C. Graves, who had been with Mrs. Markham before the lineup
testified that she was, quote, quite hysterical, end quote, and was, quote, crying and upset, end quote.
He said that Mrs. Markham started crying when Oswald walked into the lineup room.
In testimony before the Commission, Mrs. Markham confirmed her positive identification of Lee Harvey Oswald
as the man she saw kill Officer Tippit. In evaluating Mrs. Markham's identification of Oswald, the Commission considered certain allegations
That Mrs. Markham described the man who killed Patrolman Tippit as, quote, short, a little on the heavy side, end quote.
and having, quote, somewhat bushy, end quote, hair.
The Commission reviewed the transcript of a phone conversation in which Mrs. Markham is alleged to have provided such a description.
A review of the complete transcript has satisfied the Commission
that Mrs. Markham strongly reaffirmed her positive identification of Oswald and denied having described the killer
as short, stocky and having bushy hair. She stated that the man weighed about 150 pounds.
Although she used the words, quote, a little bit bushy, end quote, to describe the gunman's hair,
the transcript establishes that she was referring to the uncombed state of his hair, a description fully supported by a photograph of Oswald
taken at the time of his arrest.
Although in the phone conversation she described the man as, quote, short, end quote, on November 22nd,
within minutes of the shooting and before the lineup, Mrs. Markham described the man to the police as 5 foot 8 inches tall.
During her testimony Mrs. Markham initially denied that she ever had the above phone conversation.
She has subsequently admitted the existence of the conversation and offered an explanation for her denial.
Addressing itself solely to the probative value of Mrs. Markham's contemporaneous description of the gunman
and her positive identification of Oswald at a police lineup, the Commission considers her testimony reliable.
However, even in the absence of Mrs. Markham's testimony, there is ample evidence to identify Oswald as the killer of Tippit.
Two young women,
Barbara Jeanette Davis and Virginia Davis, were in an apartment of a multiple-unit house on the southeast corner of 10th and Patton
when they heard the sound of gunfire and the screams of Helen Markham.
They ran to the door in time to see a man with a revolver cut across their lawn and disappear around a corner of the house onto Patton.
Barbara Jeanette Davis assumed that he was emptying his gun as, quote, he had it open and was shaking it, end quote. She immediately called the police.
Later in the day each woman found an empty shell on the ground near the house. These two shells were delivered to the police.
On the evening of November 22,
Barbara Jeanette and Virginia Davis viewed a group of four men in a lineup and each one picked Oswald as the man who crossed their lawn while emptying his pistol.
Barbara Jeanette Davis testified that no one had shown her a picture of Oswald before the identification and that she had not seen him on television.
She was not sure whether she had seen his picture in a newspaper on the afternoon or evening of November 22 prior to the lineup.
Her reaction when she saw Oswald in the lineup was that, quote,
I was pretty sure it was the same man I saw. When they made him turn sideways, I was positive that was the one I seen, end quote.
Similarly, Virginia Davis had not been shown pictures of anyone prior to the lineup and had not seen either television or the newspapers during the afternoon.
She identified Oswald, who was the No. 2 man in the lineup, as the man she saw running with the gun:
she testified, quote, I would say that was him for sure, end quote.
Barbara Jeanette Davis and Virginia Davis were sitting alongside each other when they made their positive identifications of Oswald.
Each woman whispered Oswald's number to the detective. Each testified that she was the first to make the identification.
William Arthur Smith was about a block east of 10th and Patton when he heard shots.
He looked west on 10th and saw a man running to the west and a policeman falling to the ground.
Smith failed to make himself known to the police on November 22.
Several days later he reported what he had seen and was questioned by FBI agents.
Smith subsequently told a Commission staff member
that he saw Oswald on television the night of the murder and thought that Oswald was the man he had seen running away from the shooting.
On television Oswald's hair looked blond, whereas Smith remembered that the man who ran away had hair that was brown or brownish black.
Later, the FBI showed Smith a picture of Oswald. In the picture the hair was brown.
According to his testimony, Smith told the FBI, quote, It looked more like him than it did on television, end quote,
He stated further that from, quote, What I saw of him, end quote, the man looked like the man in the picture.
Two other important eyewitnesses to Oswald's flight were Ted Callaway,
manager of a used-car lot on the northeast corner of Patton Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard, and Sam Guinyard, a porter at the lot.
They heard the sound of shots to the north of their lot. Callaway heard five shots, and Guinyard three.
Both ran to the sidewalk on the east side of Patton at a point about a half a block south of 10th.
They saw a man coming south on Patton with a revolver held high in his right hand. According to Callaway, the man crossed to the west side of Patton.
From across the street Callaway yelled, quote, Hey, man, what the hell is going on? End quote.
He slowed down, halted, said something, and then kept on going to the corner, turned right, and continued west on Jefferson.
Guinyard claimed that the man ran down the east side of Patton and passed within 10 feet of him before crossing to the other side.
Guinyard and Callaway ran to 10th and Patton and found Tippit lying in the street beside his car.
Apparently he had reached for his gun; it lay beneath him outside of the holster.
Callaway picked up the gun.
He and Scoggins attempted to chase down the gunman in Scoggin's taxicab, but he had disappeared.
Early in the evening of November 22,
Guinyard and Callaway viewed the same lineup of four men from which Mrs. Markham had earlier made her identification of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Both men picked Oswald as the man who had run south on Patton with a gun in his hand.
Callaway told the Commission, quote, So they brought four men in.
I stepped to the back of the room, so I could kind of see him from the same distance which I had seen him before. And when he came out I knew him, end quote.
Guinyard said, quote, I told them that was him right there. I pointed him out right there, end quote.
Both Callaway and Guinyard testified that they had not been shown any pictures by the police before the lineup.
The Dallas Police Department furnished the Commission with pictures of the men who appeared in the lineups with Oswald,
and the Commission has inquired into general lineup procedures used by the Dallas police as well as the specific procedures in the lineups involving Oswald.
The Commission is satisfied that the lineups were conducted fairly.
As Oswald ran south on Patton Avenue toward Jefferson Boulevard he was moving in the direction of a used-car lot
located on the southeast corner of this intersection.
Four men -- Warren Reynolds, Harold Russell, Pat Patterson, and L. J. Lewis
were on the lot at the time, and they saw a white male with a revolver in his hands running south on Patton.
When the man reached Jefferson, he turned right and headed west.
Reynolds and Patterson decided to follow him.
When he reached a gasoline service station one block away he turned north and walked toward a parking area in the rear of the station.
Neither Reynolds nor Patterson saw the man after he turned off Jefferson at the service station.
These four witnesses were interviewed by FBI agents 2 months after the shooting.
Russell and Patterson were shown a picture of Oswald and they stated that Oswald was the man they saw on November 22, 1963.
Russell confirmed this statement in a sworn affidavit for the Commission.
Patterson, when asked later to confirm his identification by affidavit said he did not recall having been shown the photograph.
He was then shown two photographs of Oswald and he advised that Oswald was, quote, unquestionably, end quote, the man he saw.
Reynolds did not make a positive identification when interviewed by the FBI, but
he subsequently testified before a Commission staff member and, when shown two photographs of Oswald, stated that they were photographs of the man he saw.
L.J. Lewis said in an interview that because of the distance from which he observed the gunman he would hesitate to state whether the man was identical with Oswald.
When Oswald was arrested, he had in his possession a Smith & Wesson 38 Special caliber revolver,
serial number V510210.
Two of the arresting officers placed their initials on the weapon and a third inscribed his name.
All three identified Exhibit No. 143 as the revolver taken from Oswald when he was arrested.
Four cartridge cases were found in the shrubbery on the corner of 10th and Patton by three of the eyewitnesses -- Domingo Benavides,
Barbara Jeanette Davis, and Virginia Davis.
It was the unanimous and unequivocal testimony of expert witnesses before the Commission that these used cartridge cases were fired from the revolver
in Oswald's possession to the exclusion of all other weapons.
Cortlandt Cunningham, of the Firearms Identification Unit of the FBI Laboratory, testified
that he compared the four empty cartridge cases found near the scene of the shooting with a test cartridge fired from the weapon in Oswald's possession when he was arrested.
Cunningham declared that this weapon fired the four cartridges to the exclusion of all other weapons.
Identification was effected through breech face marks and firing pin marks.
Robert A. Frazier and Charles Killion, other FBI firearms experts,
independently examined the four cartridge cases and arrived at the same conclusion as Cunningham.
At the request of the Commission, Joseph D. Nicol, superintendent of the Illinois Bureau of Criminal Identification Investigation,
also examined the four cartridge cases found near the site of the homicide and compared them with the test cartridge cases fired from the Smith & Wesson revolver
taken from Oswald.
He concluded that all of these cartridges were fired from the same weapon.
Cunningham compared four lead bullets recovered from the body of Patrolman Tippit with test bullets fired from Oswald's revolver.
He explained that the bullets were slightly smaller than the barrel of the pistol which had fired them. This caused the bullets to have an erratic passage through the barrel
and impressed upon the lead of the bullets inconsistent individual characteristics which made identification impossible.
Consecutive bullets fired from the revolver by the FBI experts could not be identified as having been fired from that revolver.
Cunningham testified that all of the bullets were mutilated, one being useless for comparison purposes.
All four bullets were fired from a weapon
with five lands and grooves and a right twist which were the rifling characteristics of the revolver taken from Oswald.
He concluded, however, that he could not say whether the four bullets were fired from the revolver in Oswald's possession.
Quote: The only thing I can testify is they could have on the basis of the rifling characteristics -- they could have been, end quote,
Nicol differed with the FBI experts on one bullet taken from Tippit's body.
He declared that this bullet was fired from the same weapon that fired the test bullets to the exclusion of all other weapons.
But he agreed that because the other three bullets were mutilated, he could not determine if they had been fired from the same weapon as the test bullets.
The examination and testimony of the experts enabled the Commission to conclude that five shots may have been fired,
even though only four bullets were recovered.
Three of the bullets recovered from Tippit's body were manufactured by Winchester-Western, and the fourth bullet by Remington-Peters,
but only two of the four discarded cartridge cases found on the lawn at 10th Street and Patton Avenue were of Winchester-Western manufacture.
Therefore, one cartridge case of this type was not recovered.
And though only one bullet of Remington-Peters manufacture was recovered, two empty cartridge cases of that make were retrieved.
Therefore, either one bullet of Remington-Peters manufacture is missing
or one used Remington-Peters cartridge case, which may have been in the revolver before the shooting,
was discarded along with the others as Oswald left the scene.
If a bullet is missing, five were fired. This corresponds with the observation and memory of Ted Callaway, and possibly Warren Reynolds,
but not with the other eyewitnesses who claim to have heard from two to four shots.
Ownership of Revolver
By checking certain importers and dealers after the assassination of President Kennedy and slaying of Officer Tippit,
agents of the FBI determined that George Rose & Co. of Los Angeles was a major distributor of this type of revolver.
Records of Seaport Traders, Incorporated, a mail-order division of George Rose & Co.,
disclosed that on January 3, 1963,
the company received from Empire Wholesale Sporting Goods, Ltd., Montreal, a shipment of 99 guns in one case.
Among these guns was a .38 Special caliber Smith & Wesson revolver, serial No. V510210,
the only revolver made by Smith & Wesson with this serial number. When first manufactured, it had a 5-inch barrel.
George Rose & Co. had the barrel shortened by a gunsmith to two and one quarter inches.
Sometime after January 27, 1963,
Seaport Traders, Incorporated, received through the mail a mail-order coupon for one, quote, point three-eight
S T. W. 2 inch BBL, unquote, cost $29.95.
Ten dollars in cash was enclosed.
The order was signed in ink by, quote,
A. J. Hidell, aged 28, end quote. The date of the order was January 27. No year shown.
and the return address was Post Office Box 2915, Dallas, Texas.
Also on the order form was an order, written in ink, for one box of ammunition and one holster, but a line was drawn through these items.
The mail-order form had a line for the name of a witness to attest that the person ordering the gun was a U.S. citizen and had not been convicted of a felony.
The name written in this space was D. F. Drittal.
Heinz W. Michaelis, office manager of both George Rose & Co., Incorporated and Seaport Traders, Incorporated.
identified records of Seaport Traders, Incorporated, which showed that a, quote, point three eight
S and W Special two-inch Commando, serial number V510210, end quote,
was shipped on March 20, 1963, to A. J. Hidell, Post Office Box 2915, Dallas, Texas.
The invoice was prepared on March 13, 1963; the revolver was actually shipped on March 20 by Railway Express.
The balance due on the purchase was $19.95.
Michaelis furnished the shipping copy of the invoice, and the Railway Express Agency shipping documents, showing that
$19.95, plus $1.27 shipping charge, had been collected from the consignee, Hidell.
Handwriting experts, Alwyn Cole of the Treasury Department and James C. Cadigan of the FBI,
testified before the Commission that the writing on the coupon was Oswald's.
The signature of the witness, D. F. Drittal,
who attested that the fictitious Hidell was an American citizen and had not been convicted of a felony, was also in Oswald's handwriting.
Marina Oswald gave as her opinion that the mail-order coupon was in Oswald's handwriting.
When shown the revolver, she stated that she recognized it as the one owned by her husband.
She also testified that this appeared to be the revolver seen in Oswald's belt
in the picture she took in late March or early April 1963 when the family was living on Neely Street in Dallas.
Police found an empty revolver holster when they searched Oswald's room on Beckley Avenue after his arrest.
Marina Oswald testified that this was the holster which contained the revolver in the photographs taken on Neely Street.
Oswald's Jacket
Approximately 15 minutes before the shooting of Tippit, Oswald was seen leaving his roominghouse.
He was wearing a zipper jacket which he had not been wearing moments before when he had arrived home.
When Oswald was arrested, he did not have a jacket.
Shortly after Tippit was slain, policemen found a light-colored zipper jacket along the route taken by the killer as he attempted to escape.
At 1:22 p.m. the Dallas police radio described the man wanted for the murder of Tippit as, quote, a white male about thirty,
five foot eight inches, black hair, slender, wearing a white jacket, white shirt and dark slacks, end quote,
According to Patrolman Poe this description came from Mrs. Markham and Mrs. Barbara Jeanette Davis.
Mrs. Markham told Poe
that the man was a, quote, white male, about 25, about five feet eight, brown hair, medium, end quote, and wearing a, quote,
white jacket, end quote,
Mrs. Davis gave Poe the same general description: a, quote, white male in his early twenties, around five foot seven inches
or eight inches, about 145 pounds, end quote, and wearing a white jacket.
As has been discussed previously,
two witnesses, Warren Reynolds and B. M. Patterson, saw the gunman run toward the rear of a gasoline service station on Jefferson Boulevard.
Mrs. Mary Brock, the wife of a mechanic who worked at the station, was there at the time and she saw a white male,
5 feet, 10 inches, wearing light clothing, a light-colored jacket" walk past her at a fast pace with his hands in his pocket.
She last saw him in the parking lot directly behind the service station.
When interviewed by FBI agents on January 21, 1964,
she identified a picture of Oswald as being the same person she saw on November 22.
She confirmed this interview by a sworn affidavit.
At 1:24 p.m., the police radio reported, quote,
The suspect last seen running west on Jefferson from 400 East Jefferson.
Police Capt. W. R. Westbrook and several other officers concentrated their search along Jefferson Boulevard.
Westbrook walked through the parking lot behind the service station and found a light-colored jacket lying under the rear of one of the cars.
Westbrook identified Commission Exhibit No. 162 as the light-colored jacket which he discovered underneath the automobile.
This jacket belonged to Lee Harvey Oswald. Marina Oswald stated that her husband owned only two jackets, one blue and the other gray.
The blue jacket was found in the Texas School Book Depository and was identified by Marina Oswald as her husband's.
Marina Oswald also identified Commission Exhibit No. 162, the jacket found by Captain Westbrook, as her husband's second jacket.
The eyewitnesses vary in their identification of the jacket.
Mrs. Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper at Oswald's roominghouse and the last person known to have seen him before he reached 10th Street and Patton Avenue,
said that she may have seen the gray zipper jacket but she was not certain.
It seemed to her that the jacket Oswald wore was darker than Commission Exhibit No. 162.
Ted Callaway, who saw the gunman moments after the shooting, testified that Commission Exhibit No. 162
looked like the jacket he was wearing but, quote, I thought it had a little more tan to it, end quote.
Two other witnesses, Sam Guinyard and William Arthur Smith,
testified that Commission Exhibit No. 162 was the jacket worn by the man they saw on November 22.
Mrs. Markham and Barbara Davis thought that the jacket worn by the slayer of Tippit was darker than the jacket found by Westbrook.
Scoggins thought it was lighter.
There is no doubt, however, that Oswald was seen leaving his roominghouse at about 1 p.m. wearing a zipper jacket,
that the man who killed Tippit was wearing a light-colored jacket,
that he was seen running along Jefferson Boulevard, that a jacket was found under a car in a lot adjoining Jefferson Boulevard
that the jacket belonged to Lee Harvey Oswald, and that when he was arrested at approximately 1:50 p.m., he was in shirt sleeves.
These facts warrant the finding that Lee Harvey Oswald disposed of his jacket as he fled from the scene of the Tippit killing.
The foregoing evidence establishes that (1) two eyewitnesses who heard the shots and saw the shooting of Dallas Police Patrolman J. D. Tippit
and seven eyewitnesses who saw the flight of the gunman with revolver in hand
positively identified Lee Harvey Oswald as the man they saw fire the shots or flee from the scene,
(2) the cartridge cases found near the scene of the shooting were fired from the revolver in the possession of Oswald at the time of his arrest,
to the exclusion of all other weapons,
(3) the revolver in Oswald's possession at the time of his arrest was purchased by and belonged to Oswald, and (4)
Oswald's jacket was found along the path of flight taken by the gunman as he fled from the scene of the killing.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 7.
Oswald's Arrest
The Texas Theatre is on the north side of Jefferson Boulevard, approximately eight blocks from the scene of the Tippit shooting and six blocks
from where several witnesses last saw Oswald running west on Jefferson Boulevard. Shortly after the Tippit murder,
police sirens sounded along Jefferson Boulevard.
One of the persons who heard the sirens was Johnny Calvin Brewer, manager of Hardy's Shoestore, a few doors east of the Texas Theatre.
Brewer knew from radio broadcasts that the President had been shot and that a patrolman had also been shot in Oak Cliff.
When he heard police sirens, he, quote, looked up and saw the man enter the lobby, end quote.
a recessed area extending about 15 feet between the sidewalk and the front door of his store.
A police car made a U-turn, and as the sirens grew fainter,
the man in the lobby, quote, looked over his shoulder and turned around and walked up West Jefferson towards the theatre, end quote.
The man wore a T-shirt beneath his outer shirt and he had no jacket.
Brewer said, quote, He just looked funny to me. His hair was sort of messed up and looked like he had been running, and he looked scared, and he looked funny, end quote.
Mrs. Julia Postal, selling tickets at the box office of the Texas Theatre,
heard police sirens and then saw a man as he, quote, ducked into, end quote, the outer lobby space of the theatre near the ticket office.
Attracted by the sound of the sirens, Mrs. Postal stepped out of the box office and walked to the curb.
Shortly thereafter, Johnny Brewer, who had come from the nearby shoestore, asked Mrs. Postal whether the fellow that had ducked in had bought a ticket.
She said, quote, No; by golly, he didn't, end quote, and turned around, but the man was nowhere in sight.
Brewer told Mrs. Postal that he had seen the man ducking into his place of business and that he had followed him to the theatre.
She sent Brewer into the theatre to find the man and check the exits, told him about the assassination, and said, quote,
I don't know if this is the man they want. But he is running from them for some reason, end quote, She then called the police.
At 1:45 p.m., the police radio stated, quote, Have information a suspect just went in the Texas Theatre on West Jefferson, end quote.
Patrol cars bearing at least 15 officers converged on the Texas Theatre.
Patrolman M. N. McDonald, with Patrolmen R. Hawkins, T. A. Hutson, and C. T. Walker, entered the theatre from the rear.
Other policemen entered the front door and searched the balcony.
Detective Paul L. Bentley rushed to the balcony and told the projectionist to turn up the house lights.
Brewer met McDonald and the other policemen at the alley exit door,
stepped out onto the stage with them and pointed out the man who had come into the theatre without paying.
The man was Oswald. He was sitting alone in the rear of the main floor of the theatre near the right center aisle.
About six or seven people were seated on the theatre's main floor and an equal number in the balcony.
McDonald first searched two men in the center of the main floor, about 10 rows from the front.
He walked out of the row up the right center aisle.
When he reached the row where the suspect was sitting, McDonald stopped abruptly and told the man to get on his feet.
Oswald rose from his seat, bringing up both hands.
As McDonald started to search Oswald's waist for a gun, he heard him say, quote, Well, it's all over now, end quote.
Oswald then struck McDonald between the eyes with his left fist; with his right hand he drew a gun from his waist.
McDonald struck back with his right hand and grabbed the gun with his left hand. They both fell into the seats.
Three other officers, moving toward the scuffle, grabbed Oswald from the front, rear and side.
As McDonald fell into the seat with his left hand on the gun, he felt something graze across his hand and heard what sounded like the snap of the hammer.
McDonald felt the pistol scratch his cheek as he wrenched it away from Oswald.
Detective Bob K. Carroll, who was standing beside McDonald, seized the gun from him.
The other officers who helped subdue Oswald corroborated McDonald in his testimony
except that they did not hear Oswald say, quote, It's all over now, end quote.
Deputy Sheriff Eddy R. Walthers recalled such a remark but he did not reach the scene of the struggle
until Oswald had been knocked to the floor by McDonald and the others.
Some of the officers saw Oswald strike McDonald with his fist. Most of them heard a click which they assumed to be a click of the hammer of the revolver.
Testimony of a firearms expert before the Commission established that the hammer of the revolver never touched the shell in the chamber.
Although the witnesses did not hear the sound of a misfire,
they might have heard a snapping noise resulting from the police officer grabbing the cylinder of the revolver and pulling it away from Oswald while he was attempting to pull the trigger.
Two patrons of the theatre and John Brewer
testified regarding the arrest of Oswald, as did the various police officers who participated in the fight.
George Jefferson Applin, Jr., confirmed that Oswald fought with four or five officers before he was handcuffed.
He added that one officer grabbed the muzzle of a shotgun, drew back, and hit Oswald with the butt end of the gun in the back.
No other theatre patron or officer has testified that Oswald was hit by a gun.
Nor did Oswald ever complain that he was hit with a gun, or injured in the back.
Deputy Sheriff Walthers brought a shotgun into the theatre but laid it on some seats before helping subdue Oswald.
Officer Ray Hawkins said
that there was no one near Oswald who had a shotgun and he saw no one strike Oswald in the back with a rifle butt or the butt of a gun.
John Gibson, another patron in the theatre, saw an officer grab Oswald, and he claims that he heard the click of a gun misfiring.
He saw no shotgun in the possession of any policeman near Oswald.
Johnny Brewer testified he saw Oswald pull the revolver and the officers struggle with him to take it away
but that once he was subdued, no officer struck him.
He further stated that while fists were flying he heard one of the officers say, quote, Kill the President, will you, end quote.
It is unlikely that any of the police officers referred to Oswald as a suspect in the assassination.
While the police radio had noted the similarity in description of the two suspects, the arresting officers were pursuing Oswald for the murder of Tippit.
As Oswald, handcuffed, was led from the theatre, he was, according to McDonald, quote,
cursing a little bit and hollering police brutality, end quote.
At 1:51 p.m., police car 2 reported by radio that it was on the way to headquarters with the suspect.
Captain Fritz returned to police headquarters from the Texas School Book Depository at 2:15 after a brief stop at the sheriff's office.
When he entered the homicide and robbery bureau office, he saw two detectives standing there with Sgt. Gerald L. Hill,
who had driven from the theatre with Oswald.
Hill testified that Fritz told the detective to get a search warrant, go to an address on Fifth Street in Irving,
and pick up a man named Lee Oswald. When Hill asked why Oswald was wanted,
Fritz replied, quote, Well, he was employed down at the Book Depository and he had not been present for a roll call of the employees, end quote.
Hill said, quote, Captain, we will save you a trip. There he sits, end quote.
Statements of Oswald during Detention.
Oswald was questioned intermittently for approximately 12 hours between 2:30 p.m., on November 22, and 11 a.m.,
on November 24.
Throughout this interrogation he denied that he had anything to do either with the assassination of President Kennedy or the murder of Patrolman Tippit.
Captain Fritz of the homicide and robbery bureau did most of the questioning, but he kept no notes and there were no stenographic or tape recordings.
Representatives of other law enforcement agencies were also present, including the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service.
They occasionally participated in the questioning.
The reports prepared by those present at these interviews are set forth in appendix 11.
A full discussion of Oswald's detention and interrogation is presented in chapter 5 of this report.
During the evening of November 22, the Dallas Police Department performed paraffin tests on Oswald's hands and right cheek
in an apparent effort to determine, by means of a scientific test, whether Oswald had recently fired a weapon.
The results were positive for the hands and negative for the right cheek.
Expert testimony before the Commission
was to the effect that the paraffin test was unreliable in determining whether or not a person has fired a rifle or revolver.
The Commission has, therefore, placed no reliance on the paraffin tests administered by the Dallas police.
Oswald provided little information during his questioning.
Frequently, however, he was confronted with evidence which he could not explain, and he resorted to statements which are known to be lies.
While Oswald's untrue statements during interrogation were not considered items of positive proof
by the Commission, they had probative value in deciding the weight to be given to his denials that he assassinated President Kennedy
and killed Patrolman Tippit. Since independent evidence revealed that Oswald repeatedly and blatantly lied to the police,
the Commission gave little weight to his denials of guilt.
Denial of Rifle Ownership
From the outset, Oswald denied owning a rifle.
On November 23, Fritz confronted Oswald with the evidence that he had purchased a rifle under the fictitious name of "Hidell."
Oswald said that this was not true. Oswald denied that he had a rifle wrapped up in a blanket in the Paine garage.
Oswald also denied owning a rifle and said that since leaving the Marine Corps he had fired only a small bore 22 rifle.
On the afternoon of November 23, Officers H. M. Moore,
R. S. Stovall, and G. F. Rose obtained a search warrant and examined Oswald's effects in the Paine garage.
They discovered two photographs, each showing Oswald with a rifle and a pistol.
These photographs were shown to Oswald on the evening of November 23 and again on the morning of the 24th.
According to Fritz, Oswald sneered, saying that they were fake photographs, that he had been photographed a number of times the day before by the police,
that they had superimposed upon the photographs a rifle and a revolver. He told Fritz a number of times that the smaller photograph
was either made from the larger, or the larger photograph was made from the smaller and that at the proper time he would show that the pictures were fakes.
Fritz told him that the two small photographs were found in the Paine garage.
At that point, Oswald refused to answer any further questions.
As previously indicated, Marina Oswald testified that she took the two pictures with her husband's Imperial Reflex camera
when they lived on Neely Street.
Her testimony was fully supported by a photography expert who testified that in his opinion the pictures were not composites.
At the first interrogation, Oswald claimed that his only crime was carrying a gun and resisting arrest.
When Captain Fritz asked him why he carried the revolver, he answered, quote, Well, you know about a pistol. I just carried it, end quote.
He falsely alleged that he bought the revolver in Fort Worth, when in fact he purchased it from a mail-order house in Los Angeles.
The Aliases "Hidell" and "O. H. Lee"
The arresting officers found a forged selective service card with a picture of Oswald and the name "Alek J. Hidell"
in Oswald's billfold. On November 22 and 23, Oswald refused to tell Fritz why this card was in his possession,
or to answer any questions concerning the card.
On Sunday morning, November 24, Oswald denied that he knew A. J. Hidell.
Captain Fritz produced the selective service card bearing the name "Alek J. Hidell."
Oswald became angry and said, quote,
Now, I've told you all I'm going to tell you about that card in my billfolds -- you have the card yourself and you know as much about it as I do, end quote.
At the last interrogation in November Oswald admitted to Postal Inspector Holmes that he had rented post office box 2915, Dallas,
but denied that he had received a package in this box addressed to Hidell.
He also denied that he had received the rifle through this box.
Holmes reminded Oswald that A. J. Hidell was listed on post office box 30061, New Orleans,
as one entitled to receive mail.
Oswald replied, quote, I don't know anything about that, end quote.
When asked why he lived at his roominghouse under the name O. H. Lee,
Oswald responded that the landlady simply made a mistake, because he told her that his name was Lee, meaning his first name.
An examination of the roominghouse register revealed that Oswald actually signed the name O. H. Lee.
The Curtain Rod Story
In concluding that Oswald was carrying a rifle in the paper bag on the morning of November 22, 1963,
the Commission found that Oswald lied when he told Frazier that he was returning to Irving to obtain curtain rods.
When asked about the curtain rod story, Oswald lied again.
He denied that he had ever told Frazier that he wanted a ride to Irving to get curtain rods for an apartment.
He explained that a party for the Paine children had been planned for the weekend and he preferred not to be in the Paine house at that time;
therefore, he made his weekly visit on Thursday night.
Actually, the party for one of the Paine's children was the preceding weekend, when Marina Oswald suggested that Oswald remain in Dallas.
When told that Frazier and Mrs. Randle had seen him carrying a long heavy package, Oswald replied, quote, Well, they was mistaken.
that must have been some other time he picked me up, end quote,
In one interview, he told Fritz that the only sack he carried to work that day
was a lunch sack which he kept on his lap during the ride from Irving to Dallas.
Frazier testified before the Commission that Oswald carried no lunch sack that day.
Actions During and After Shooting
During the first interrogation on November 22, Fritz asked Oswald to account for himself at the time the President was shot.
Oswald told him that he ate lunch in the first-floor lunchroom and then went to the second floor for a Coke which he brought downstairs.
He acknowledged the encounter with the police officer on the second floor.
Oswald told Fritz that after lunch he went outside, talked with Foreman Bill Shelley for 5 or 10 minutes and then left for home.
He said that he left work because Bill Shelley said that there would be no more work done that day in the building.
Shelley denied seeing Oswald after 12 noon or at any time after the shooting.
The next day, Oswald added to his story.
He stated that at the time the President was shot he was having lunch with "Junior" but he did not give Junior's last name.
The only employee at the Depository Building named "Junior" was James Jarman, Jr.
Jarman testified that he ate his lunch on the first floor around 5 minutes to 12, and that he neither ate lunch with nor saw Oswald.
Jarman did talk to Oswald that morning: Quote,
he asked me what were the people gathering around on the corner for and I told him that the President was supposed to pass that morning,
and he asked me did I know which way he was coming, and I told him, yes, he probably come down Main and turn on Houston and then back again on Elm.
Then he said, "Oh, I see," and that was all.
Prior attempt to kill.
The Attempt on the Life of Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker
At approximately 9 p.m., on April 10, 1963, in Dallas, Texas, Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker,
an active and controversial figure on the American political scene since his resignation from the U.S. Army in 1961
narrowly escaped death when a rifle bullet fired from outside his home passed near his head as he was seated at his desk.
There were no eyewitnesses, although a 14-year-old boy in a neighboring house claimed that immediately after the shooting
he saw two men, in separate cars, drive out of a church parking lot adjacent to Walker's home. A friend of Walker's testified that
two nights before the shooting he saw, quote, two men around the house peeking in windows, end quote.
General Walker gave this information to the police before the shooting, but it did not help solve the crime.
Although the bullet was recovered from Walker's house, in the absence of a weapon it was of little investigatory value.
General Walker hired two investigators to determine whether a former employee might have been involved in the shooting.
Their results were negative.
Until December 3, 1963, the Walker shooting remained unsolved.
The Commission evaluated the following evidence in considering whether Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shot which almost killed General Walker:
A note which Oswald left for his wife on the evening of the shooting,
(2) photographs found among Oswald's possessions after the assassination of President Kennedy,
(3) firearm identification of the bullet found in Walker's home, and (4)
admissions and other statements made to Marina Oswald by Oswald concerning the shooting. Note left by Oswald.
On December 2, 1963, Mrs. Ruth Paine turned over to the police some of the Oswalds' belongings,
including a Russian volume entitled, quote, Book of Useful Advice, end quote. In this book was an undated note written in Russian.
In translation, the note read as follows: 1.
This is the key to the mailbox which is located in the main post office in the city on Ervay Street.
This is the same street where the drugstore, in which you always waited is located.
You will find the mailbox in the post office which is located 4 blocks from the drugstore on that street.
I paid for the box last month so don't worry about it.
2. Send the information as to what has happened to me to the Embassy.
and include newspaper clippings (should there be anything about me in the newspapers). I believe that the Embassy will come quickly to your assistance on learning everything.
3. I paid the house rent on the 2nd so don't worry about it. 4. Recently I also paid for water and gas.
5. The money from work will possibly be coming. The money will be sent to our post office box. Go to the bank and cash the check.
6. You can either throw out or give my clothing, etc. away. Do not keep these.
However, I prefer that you hold on to my personal papers (military, civil, etc.).
7. Certain of my documents are in the small blue valise.
10. I left you as much money as I could,
$60 on the second of the month. You and the baby can live for another 2 months using $10 per week.
11. If I am alive and taken prisoner,
the city jail is located at the end of the bridge through which we always passed on going to the city (right in the beginning of the city after crossing the bridge).
James C. Cadigan, FBI handwriting expert, testified that this note was written by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Prior to the Walker shooting on April 10, Oswald had been attending typing classes on Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings.
He had quit these classes at least a week before the shooting, which occurred on a Wednesday night.
According to Marina Oswald's testimony, on the night of the Walker shooting, her husband left their apartment on Neely Street shortly after dinner.
She thought he was attending a class or was on his own business.
When he failed to return by 10 or 10:30 p.m., Marina Oswald went to his room and discovered the note. She testified: quote,
When he came back I asked him what had happened. He was very pale.
I don't remember the exact time, but it was very late. And he told me not to ask him any questions. He only told me he had shot at General Walker.
Oswald told his wife that he did not know whether he had hit Walker;
according to Marina Oswald when he learned on the radio and in the newspapers the next day that he had missed,
he said that he, quote, was very sorry that he had not hit him, end quote. Marina Oswald's testimony was fully supported by the note itself
which appeared to be the work of a man expecting to be killed, or imprisoned, or to disappear.
The last paragraph directed her to the jail
and the other paragraphs instructed her on the disposal of Oswald's personal effects and the management of her affairs if he should not return.
It is clear that the note was written while the Oswalds were living in Dallas before they moved to New Orleans in the spring of 1963.
The references to house rent and payments for water and gas
indicated that the note was written when they were living in a rented apartment; therefore it could not have been written while Marina Oswald was living with the Paines.
Moreover, the reference in paragraph 3 to paying, quote, the house rent on the 2nd, end quote,
would be consistent with the period when the Oswalds were living on Neely Street since the apartment was rented on March 3, 1963.
Oswald had paid the first month's rent in advance on March 2, 1963,
and the second month's rent was paid on either April 2 or April 3.
The main post office, quote, on Ervay Street, end quote, refers to the post office where Oswald rented box 2915
from October 9, 1962, to May 14, 1963.
Another statement which limits the time when it could have been written is the reference, quote, you and the baby, end quote,
which would indicate that it was probably written before the birth of Oswald's second child on October 20, 1963.
Oswald had apparently mistaken the county jail for the city jail.
From Neely Street the Oswalds would have traveled downtown on the Beckley bus, across the Commerce Street viaduct
and into downtown Dallas through the Triple Underpass.
Either the viaduct or the underpass might have been the "bridge" mentioned in the last paragraph of the note.
The county jail is at the corner of Houston and Main Streets, quote, right in the beginning of the city, end quote, after one travels through the underpass.
In her testimony before the Commission in February 1964,
Marina Oswald stated that when Oswald returned home on the night of the Walker shooting, he told her that he had been planning the attempt for 2 months.
He showed her a notebook 3 days later containing photographs of General Walker's home and a map of the area where the house was located.
Although Oswald destroyed the notebook, three photographs found among Oswald's possessions after the assassination
were identified by Marina Oswald as photographs of General Walker's house.
Two of these photographs were taken from the rear of Walker's house.
The Commission confirmed, by comparison with other photographs, that these were, indeed, photographs of the rear of Walker's house.
An examination of the window at the rear of the house, the wall through which the bullet passed, and the fence behind the house
indicated that the bullet was fired from a position near the point where one of the photographs was taken.
The third photograph identified by Marina Oswald depicts the entrance to General Walker's driveway from a back alley.
Also seen in the picture is the fence on which Walker's assailant apparently rested the rifle.
An examination of certain construction work appearing in the background of this photograph revealed that the picture was taken between March 8
and 12, 1963, and most probably on either March 9 or March 10.
Oswald purchased the money order for the rifle on March 12, the rifle was shipped on March 20, and the shooting occurred on April 10.
A photography expert with the FBI
was able to determine that, this picture was taken with the Imperial Reflex camera owned by Lee Harvey Oswald.
A fourth photograph, showing a stretch of railroad tracks,
was also identified by Marina Oswald as having been taken by her husband, presumably in connection with the Walker shooting.
Investigation determined that this photograph was taken approximately seven-tenths of a mile from Walker's house.
Another photograph of railroad tracks found among Oswald's possessions was not identified by his wife,
but investigation revealed that it was taken from a point slightly less than half a mile from General Walker's house.
Marina Oswald stated that- when she asked her husband what be had done with the rifle,
he replied that he had buried it in the ground or hidden it in some bushes and that he also mentioned a railroad track in this connection.
She testified that several days later Oswald recovered his rifle and brought it back to their apartment.
Firearms identification.
In the room beyond the one in which General Walker was sitting on the night of the shooting the Dallas police recovered a badly mutilated bullet
which had come to rest on a stack of paper.
The Dallas City-County Investigation Laboratory tried to determine the type of weapon which fired the bullet.
The oral report was negative because of the battered condition of the bullet.
On November 30, 1963, the FBI requested the bullet for ballistics examination;
the Dallas Police Department forwarded it on December 2, 1963.
Robert A. Frazier, an FBI ballistics identification expert, testified that he was, quote, unable to reach a conclusion, end quote,
as to whether or not the bullet recovered from Walker's house had been fired from the rifle found on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository Building.
He concluded that, quote, the general rifling characteristics of the rifle are of the same type as those found on the bullet
and, further, on this basis the bullet could have been fired from the rifle on the basis of its land and groove impressions, end quote.
Frazier testified further that the FBI avoids the category of "probable" identification.
Unless the missile or cartridge case can be identified as coming from a particular weapon to the exclusion of all others,
the FBI refuses to draw any conclusion as to probability.
Frazier testified, however, that he found no microscopic characteristics or other evidence
which would indicate that the bullet was not fired from the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle owned by Lee Harvey Oswald.
It was a 6.5-millimeter bullet
and, according to Frazier, "relatively few" types of rifles could produce the characteristics found on the bullet.
Joseph D. Nicol,
superintendent of the Illinois Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, conducted an independent examination of this bullet
and concluded, quote, that there is a fair probability, end quote, that the bullet was fired from the rifle used in the assassination of President Kennedy.
In explaining the difference between his policy and that of the FBI on the matter of probable identification, Nicol said, quote,
I am aware of their position. This is not, I am sure, arrived at without careful consideration.
However, to say that because one does not find sufficient marks for identification that it is a negative,
I think is going overboard in the other direction.
And for purposes of probative value, for whatever it might be worth,
in the absence of very definite negative evidence, I think it is permissible to say that in an exhibit such as 573
there is enough on it to say that it could have come, and even perhaps a little stronger, to say that it probably came from this,
without going so far as to say to the exclusion of all other guns. This I could not do, end quote.
Although the Commission recognizes that neither expert was able to state
that the bullet which missed General Walker was fired from Oswald's rifle to the exclusion of all others, this testimony was considered probative
when combined with the other testimony linking Oswald to the shooting.
Additional corroborative evidence.
The admissions made to Marina Oswald by her husband are an important element in the evidence that Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shot at General Walker.
As shown above, the note and the photographs of Walker's house and of the nearby railroad tracks
provide important corroboration for her account of the incident.
Other details described by Marina Oswald coincide with facts developed independently of her statements.
She testified that her husband had postponed his attempt to kill Walker
until that Wednesday because he had heard that there was to be a gathering at the church next door to Walker's house on that evening.
He indicated that he wanted more people in the vicinity at the time of the attempt so that his arrival and departure would not attract great attention.
An official of this church told FBI agents that services are held every Wednesday at the church except during the month of August.
Marina Oswald also testified that her husband had used a bus to return home.
A study of the bus routes indicates that
Oswald could have taken any one of several different buses to Walker's house or to a point near the railroad tracks where he may have concealed the rifle.
It would have been possible for him to take different routes in approaching and leaving the scene of the shooting.
Based on (1) the contents of the note which Oswald left for his wife on April 10, 1963,
(2) the photographs found among Oswald's possessions,
(3) the testimony of firearms identification experts, and (4) the testimony of Marina Oswald,
the Commission has concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald attempted to take the life of Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker (Resigned, U.S. Army)
on April 10, 1963.
The finding that Lee Harvey Oswald attempted to murder a public figure in April 1963
was considered of probative value in this investigation, although the Commission's conclusion concerning the identity of the assassin
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit librivox dot org.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 8.
Richard M. Nixon Incident
Another alleged threat by Oswald against a public figure involved former Vice President Richard M. Nixon.
In January 1964, Marina Oswald and her business manager, James Martin,
told Robert Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald's brother, that Oswald had once threatened to shoot former Vice President Richard M. Nixon.
When Marina Oswald testified before the Commission on February 3 to 6, 1964,
she had failed to mention the incident when she was asked whether Oswald had ever expressed any hostility
toward any official of the United States.
The Commission first learned of this incident when Robert Oswald related it to FBI agents on February 19, 1964,
and to the Commission on February 21.
Marina Oswald appeared before the Commission again on June 11, 1964,
and testified that a few days before her husband's departure from Dallas to New Orleans on April 24, 1963,
he finished reading a morning newspaper, quote, and put on a good suit. I saw that he took a pistol.
I asked him where he was going, and why he was getting dressed. He answered Nixon is coming. I want to go and have a look, end quote.
He also said that he would use the pistol if the opportunity arose.
She reminded him that after the Walker shooting he had promised never to repeat such an act.
Marina Oswald related the events which followed, quote,
I called him into the bathroom and I closed the door and I wanted to prevent him and then I started to cry.
And I told him that he shouldn't do this, and that he had promised me.
I remember that I held him. We actually struggled for several minutes and then he quieted down. End quote.
She stated that it was not physical force which kept him from leaving the house. Quote, I couldn't keep him from going out if he really wanted to, end quote.
After further questioning
she stated that she might have been confused about shutting him in the bathroom, but that, quote, there is no doubt that he got dressed and got a gun, end quote,
Oswald's revolver
was shipped from Los Angeles on March 20, 1963, and he left for New Orleans on April 24, 1963.
No edition of either Dallas newspaper during the period January 1, 1963, to May 15, 1963,
mentioned any proposed visit by Mr. Nixon to Dallas.
Mr. Nixon advised the Commission that the only time he was in Dallas in 1963
was on November 20 to 21, 1963.
An investigation failed to reveal any invitation extended to Mr. Nixon during the period when Oswald's threat reportedly occurred.
The Commission has concluded, therefore, that regardless of what Oswald may have said to his wife
he was not actually planning to shoot Mr. Nixon at that time in Dallas.
On April 23, 1963,
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson was in Dallas for a visit which had been publicized in the Dallas newspapers
throughout April. The Commission asked Marina Oswald whether she might have misunderstood the object of her husband's threat. She stated, quote,
there is no question that in this incident it was a question of Mr. Nixon, end quote.
When asked later whether it might have been Mr. Johnson, she said, quote, Yes, no.
I am getting a little confused with so many questions.
I was absolutely convinced it was Nixon and now after all these questions I wonder if I am right in my mind? End quote.
She stated further that Oswald had only mentioned Nixon's name once during the incident. Marina Oswald might have misunderstood her husband.
Mr. Johnson was the then Vice President and his visit took place on April 23rd.
This was 1 day before Oswald left for New Orleans and Marina appeared certain that the Nixon incident, quote,
wasn't the day before. Perhaps 3 days before, end quote.
Marina Oswald speculated that the incident may have been unrelated to an actual threat.
She said, quote, It might have been that he was just trying to test me.
He was the kind of person who could try and wound somebody in that way. Possibly he didn't want to go out at all but was just doing this all as a sort of joke,
not really as a joke but rather to simply wound me, to make me feel bad, end quote.
In the absence of other evidence that Oswald actually intended to shoot someone at this time,
the Commission concluded that the incident, as described by Marina Oswald,
was of no probative value in the Commission's decision concerning the identity of the assassin of President Kennedy.
Oswald's Rifle Capability
In deciding whether Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shots which killed President Kennedy and wounded Governor Connally,
the Commission considered whether Oswald, using his own rifle,
possessed the capability to hit his target with two out of three shots under the conditions described in chapter 3.
The Commission evaluated (1) the nature of the shots, (2) Oswald's Marine training in marksmanship,
(3) his experience and practice after leaving the Marine Corps, and (4) the accuracy of the weapon and the quality of the ammunition.
The Nature of the Shots
For a rifleman situated on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository Building
the shots were at a slow-moving target proceeding on a downgrade in virtually a straight line
with the alinement of the assassin's rifle, at a range of 177 to 266 feet.
An aerial photograph of Dealey Plaza shows that Elm Street runs at an angle
so that the President would have been moving in an almost straight line away from the assassin's rifle.
In addition, the 3 degree downward slope of Elm Street was of assistance in eliminating at least some of the adjustment
which is ordinarily required when a marksman must raise his rifle as a target moves farther away.
Four marksmanship experts testified before the Commission.
Maj. Eugene D. Anderson, assistant head of the Marksmanship Branch of U.S. Marine Corps
testified that the shots which struck the President in the neck and in the head were, quote, not particularly difficult, end quote.
Robert A. Frazier, FBI expert in firearms identification and training, said, quote,
From my own experience in shooting over the years,
when you shoot at 175 feet or 260 feet, which is less than a hundred yards, with a telescopic sight,
you should not have any difficulty in hitting your target. I mean it requires no training at all to shoot a weapon with a telescopic sight
once you know that you must put the crosshairs on the target and that is all that is necessary.
Ronald Simmons, chief of the U.S. Army Infantry Weapons Evaluation Branch of the Ballistics Research Laboratory, said, quote,
Well, in order to achieve three hits, it would not be required that a man be an exceptional shot. A proficient man with this weapon, yes, end quote.
The effect of a four-power telescopic sight on the difficulty of these shots was considered in detail
by Master Sgt. James A. Zahm, noncommissioned officer in charge of the Marksmanship Training Unit in the Weapons Training Battalion
of the Marine Corps School at Quantico, Virginia.
Referring to a rifle with a four-power telescope, Sergeant Zahm said, quote,
this is the ideal type of weapon for moving targets
Using the scope, rapidly working a bolt and using the scope to relocate your target quickly and at the same time when you locate that target
you identify it and the crosshairs are in close relationship to the point you want to shoot at,
it just takes a minor move in aiming to bring the crosshairs to bear, and then it is a quick squeeze.
I consider it a real advantage, particularly at the range of 100 yards, in identifying your target.
It allows you to see your target clearly, and it is still of a minimum amount of power that it doesn't exaggerate your own body movements.
It just is an aid in seeing in the fact that you only have the one element, the crosshair,
in relation to the target as opposed to iron sights with aligning the sights and then aligning them on the target, end quote.
Characterizing the four-power scope as, quote, a real aid, an extreme aid, end quote, in rapid fire shooting,
Sergeant Zahm expressed the opinion that the shot which struck President Kennedy in the neck at 176.9
to 190.8 feet was, quote, very easy, end quote, and the shot which struck the President in the head
at a distance of 265.3 feet was, quote, an easy shot, end quote.
After viewing photographs depicting the alignment of Elm Street in relation to the Texas School Book Depository Building,
Zahm stated further, quote,
This is a definite advantage to the shooter, the vehicle moving directly away from him and the downgrade of the street, and he being in an elevated position
made an almost stationary target while he was aiming in, very little movement if any, end quote.
Oswald's Marine Training
In accordance with standard Marine procedures, Oswald received extensive training in marksmanship.
During the first week of an intensive 8-week training period he received instruction in sighting, aiming, and manipulation of the trigger.
He went through a series of exercises called dry firing where he assumed all positions which would later be used in the qualification course.
After familiarization with live ammunition in the .22 rifle and the .22 pistol,
Oswald, like all Marine recruits, received training on the rifle range at distances up to 500 yards,
firing 50 rounds each day for five days.
Following that training, Oswald was tested in December of 1956, and obtained a score of 212,
which was 2 points above the minimum for qualifications as a "sharpshooter" in a scale of marksman, sharpshooter, expert.
In May of 1959, on another range, Oswald scored 191, which was 1 point over the minimum for ranking as a "marksman."
The Marine Corps records maintained on Oswald further show that he had fired and was familiar with the Browning Automatic rifle,
.45 caliber pistol, and 12-gauge riot gun.
Based on the general Marine Corps ratings, Lt. Col. A. G. Folsom, Jr.
head, Records Branch, Personnel Department, Headquarters U.S. Marine Corps,
evaluated the sharpshooter qualification as a, quote, fairly good shot, end quote, and a low marksman rating
as a, quote, rather poor shot, end quote.
When asked to explain the different scores achieved by Oswald on the two occasions when he fired for record,
Major Anderson said, quote, when he fired that two twelve
he had just completed a very intensive preliminary training period.
He had the services of an experienced highly trained coach.
He had high motivation. He had presumably a good to excellent rifle and good ammunition.
We have nothing here to show under what conditions the B course was fired. It might well have been a bad day for firing the rifle
windy, rainy, dark. There is little probability that he had good, expert coach,
and he probably didn't have as high a motivation because he was no longer in recruit training and under the care of the drill instructor.
There is some possibility that the rifle he was firing might not have been as good a rifle as the rifle that he was firing in his A course firing,
because he may well have carried this rifle for quite some time, and it got banged around in normal usage.
End quote. Major Anderson concluded, quote, I would say that as compared to other Marines receiving the same type of training,
that Oswald was a good shot, somewhat better than or equal to -- better than the average let us say.
As compared to a civilian who had not received this intensive training, he would be considered as a good to excellent shot. End quote.
When Sergeant Zahm was asked whether Oswald's Marine Corps training would have made it easier to operate a rifle with a four-power scope, he replied, quote,
Based on that training, his basic knowledge in sight manipulation and trigger squeeze and what not, I would say that he would be capable of sighting that rifle in well,
firing it, with 10 rounds.
After reviewing Oswald's marksmanship scores,
Sergeant Zahm concluded, quote, I would say in the Marine Corps he is a good shot, slightly above average,
and as compared to the average male of his age throughout the civilian, throughout the United States, that he is an excellent shot, end quote.
Oswald's Rifle Practice Outside the Marines
During one of his leaves from the Marines, Oswald hunted with his brother Robert,
using a .22 caliber bolt-action rifle belonging either to Robert or Robert's in-laws.
After he left the Marines and before departing for Russia, Oswald, his brother, and a third companion went hunting for squirrels and rabbits.
On that occasion Oswald again used a bolt-action .22 caliber rifle; and according to Robert,
Lee Oswald exhibited an average amount of proficiency with that weapon.
Oswald obtained a hunting license, joined a hunting club and went hunting about six times, as discussed more fully in chapter 6.
Soon after Oswald returned from the Soviet Union
he again went hunting with his brother, Robert, and used a borrowed .22 caliber bolt-action rifle.
After Oswald purchased the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, he told his wife that he practiced with it.
Marina Oswald testified that on one occasion she saw him take the rifle, concealed in a raincoat, from the house on Neely Street.
Oswald told her he was going to practice with it.
According to George De Mohrenschildt, Oswald said that he went target shooting with that rifle.
Marina Oswald testified that in New Orleans in May of 1963, she observed Oswald sitting with the rifle on their screened porch at night,
sighting with the telescopic lens and operating the bolt.
Examination of the cartridge cases found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building
established that they had been previously loaded and ejected from the assassination rifle,
which would indicate that Oswald practiced operating the bolt.
Accuracy of Weapon
It will be recalled from the discussion in chapter 3
that the assassin in all probability hit two out of the three shots during the maximum time span of
4.8 to 5.6 seconds if the second shot missed,
or, if either the first or third shots missed, the assassin fired the three shots during a minimum time span of 7.1
to 7.9 seconds.
A series of tests were performed to determine whether the weapon and ammunition used in the assassination
were capable of firing the shots which were fired by the assassin on November 22, 1963.
The ammunition used by the assassin was manufactured by Western Cartridge Co. of East Alton, Illinois.
In tests with the Mannlicher-Carcano C2766 rifle, over 100 rounds of this ammunition were fired by the FBI
and the Infantry Weapons Evaluation Branch of the U.S. Army. There were no misfires.
In an effort to test the rifle under conditions which simulated those which prevailed during the assassination,
the Infantry Weapons Evaluation Branch of the Ballistics Research Laboratory had expert riflemen fire the assassination weapon
from a tower at three silhouette targets at distances of 175, 240, and 265 feet.
The target at 265 feet was placed to the right of the 240-foot target
which was in turn placed to the right of the closest silhouette.
Using the assassination rifle mounted with the telescopic sight, three marksmen, rated as master by the National Rifle Association,
each fired two series of three shots.
In the first series the firers required time spans of 4.6, 6.75,
and 8.25 seconds respectively.
On the second series they required 5.15, 6.45, and 7 seconds.
None of the marksmen had any practice with the assassination weapon except for exercising the bolt for 2 or 3 minutes on a dry run.
They had not even pulled the trigger because of concern about breaking the firing pin.
The marksmen took as much time as they wanted for the first target and all hit the target.
For the first four attempts, the firers missed the second shot by several inches.
The angle from the first to the second shot
was greater than from the second to the third shot and required a movement in the basic firing position of the marksmen.
This angle was used in the test because the majority of the eyewitnesses to the assassination
stated that there was a shorter interval between shots two and three than between shots one and two.
As has been shown in chapter 3, if the three shots were fired within a period of from 4.8 to 5.6 seconds,
the shots would have been evenly spaced and the assassin would not have incurred so sharp an angular movement.
Five of the six shots hit the third target where the angle of movement of the weapon was small.
On the basis of these results, Simmons testified that in his opinion the probability of hitting the targets at the relatively short range at which they were hit
Considering the various probabilities which may have prevailed during the actual assassination,
the highest level of firing performance which would have been required of the assassin and the C2766 rifle
would have been to fire three times and hit the target twice within a span of 4.8 to 5.6 seconds.
In fact, one of the firers in the rapid fire test in firing his two series of three shots,
hit the target twice within a span of 4.6 and 5.15 seconds.
The others would have been able to reduce their times if they had been given the opportunity to become familiar with the movement of the bolt and the trigger pull.
Simmons testified that familiarity with the bolt could be achieved in dry practice and, as has been indicated above,
Oswald engaged in such practice. If the assassin missed either the first or third shot,
he had a total of between 4.8 and 5.6 seconds between the two shots which hit
and a total minimum time period of from 7.1 to 7.9 seconds for all three shots.
All three of the firers in these tests
were able to fire the rounds within the time period which would have been available to the assassin under those conditions.
Three FBI firearms experts tested the rifle in order to determine the speed with which it could be fired.
The purpose of this experiment was not to test the rifle under conditions which prevailed at the time of the assassination
but to determine the maximum speed at which it could be fired.
The three FBI experts each fired three shots from the weapon at 15 yards in 6, 7, and 9 seconds,
and one of these agents, Robert A. Frazier,
fired two series of three shots at 25 yards in 4.6 and 4.8 seconds.
At 15 yards each man's shots landed within the size of a dime.
The shots fired by Frazier at the range of 25 yards landed within an area of 2 inches and 5 inches respectively.
Frazier later fired four groups of three shots at a distance of 100 yards in 5.9, 6.2,
5.6, and 6.5 seconds.
Each series of three shots landed within areas ranging in diameter from 3 to 5 inches.
Although all of the shots were a few inches high and to the right of the target,
this was because of a defect in the scope which was recognized by the FBI agents and which they could have compensated for if they were aiming to hit a bull's-eye.
They were instead firing to determine how rapidly the weapon could be fired and the area within which three shots could be placed.
Frazier testified that while he could not tell when the defect occurred, but that a person familiar with the weapon could compensate for it.
Moreover, the defect was one which would have assisted the assassin aiming at a target which was moving away.
Frazier said, quote, The fact that the crosshairs are set high would actually compensate for any lead which had to be taken
So that if you aimed with this weapon as it actually was received at the laboratory, it would not be necessary to take any lead whatsoever
in order to hit the intended object. The scope would accomplish the lead for you, end quote,
Frazier added that the scope would cause a slight miss to the right.
It should be noted, however, that the President's car was curving slightly to the right when the third shot was fired.
Based on these tests the experts agreed that the assassination rifle was an accurate weapon.
Simmons described it as, quote, quite accurate, end quote, in fact, as accurate as current military rifles.
Frazier testified that the rifle was accurate, that it had less recoil than the average military rifle
and that one would not have to be an expert marksman to have accomplished the assassination with the weapon which was used.
The various tests showed that the Mannlicher-Carcano was an accurate rifle and that the use of a four-power scope
was a substantial aid to rapid, accurate firing.
Oswald's Marine training in marksmanship, his other rifle experience and his established familiarity with this particular weapon
show that he possessed ample capability to commit the assassination.
Based on the known facts of the assassination,
the Marine marksmanship experts, Major Anderson and Sergeant Zahm, concurred in the opinion that Oswald had the capability to fire three shots,
with two hits, within 4.8 and 5.6 seconds.
Concerning the shots which struck the President in the back of the neck,
Sergeant Zahm testified, quote,
With the equipment he [Oswald] had and with his ability I consider it a very easy shot, end quote.
Having fired this slot
the assassin was then required to hit the target one more time within a space of from 4.8 to 5.6 seconds.
On the basis of Oswald's training and the accuracy of the weapon as established by the tests,
the Commission concluded that Oswald was capable of accomplishing this second hit even if there was an intervening shot which missed.
The probability of hitting the President a second time would have been markedly increased if, in fact, he had missed either the first or third shots
thereby leaving a time span of 4.8 to 5.6 seconds between the two shots which struck their mark.
The Commission agrees with the testimony of Marine marksmanship expert Zahm
that it was an easy shot to hit some part of the President's body, and that the range where the rifleman would be expected to hit
would include the President's head.
On the basis of the evidence reviewed in this chapter, the Commission has found that Lee Harvey Oswald (1)
owned and possessed the rifle used to kill President Kennedy and wound Governor Connally,
(2) brought this rifle into the Depository Building on the morning of the assassination,
(3) was present, at the time of the assassination, at the window from which the shots were fired
killed Dallas Police Officer J. D. Tippit in an apparent attempt to escape,
(5) resisted arrest by drawing a fully loaded pistol and attempting to shoot another police officer,
(6) lied to the police after his arrest concerning important substantive matters,
(7) attempted, in April 1963, to kill Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker, and (8)
possessed the capability with a rifle which would have enabled him to commit the assassination.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 1.
The evidence reviewed above identifies Lee Harvey Oswald as the assassin of President Kennedy and indicates that he acted alone in that event.
There is no evidence that he had accomplices or that he was involved in any conspiracy directed to the assassination of the President.
There remains the question of what impelled Oswald to conceive and to carry out the assassination of the President of the United States.
The Commission has considered many possible motives for the assassination, including those which might flow from Oswald's commitment to Marxism or communism,
the existence of some personal grievance,
a desire to effect changes in the structure of society or simply to go down in history as a well publicized assassin.
None of these possibilities satisfactorily explains Oswald's act if it is judged by the standards of reasonable men.
The motives of any man, however, must be analyzed in terms of the character and state of mind of the particular individual involved.
For a motive that appears incomprehensible to other men may be the moving force of a man whose view of the world has been twisted,
possibly by factors of which those around him were only dimly aware.
Oswald's complete state of mind and character are now outside of the power of man to know.
He cannot, of course, be questioned or observed by those charged with the responsibility for this report or by experts on their behalf.
There is, however, a large amount of material available in his writings
and in the history of his life which does give some insight into his character and, possibly, into the motives for his act.
Since Oswald is dead,
the Commission is not able to reach any definite conclusions as to whether or not he was, quote, sane, unquote, under prevailing legal standards.
Under our system of justice no forum could properly make that determination unless Oswald were before it.
It certainly could not be made by this Commission which, as has been pointed out above,
ascertained the facts surrounding the assassination but did not draw conclusions concerning Oswald's legal guilt.
Indications of Oswald's motivation
may be obtained from a study of the events, relationships and influences which appear to have been significant in shaping his character and in guiding him.
Perhaps the most outstanding conclusion of such a study is that Oswald was profoundly alienated from the world in which he lived.
His life was characterized by isolation, frustration, and failure.
He had very few, if any, close relationships with other people and he appeared to have great difficulty in finding a meaningful place in the world.
He was never satisfied with anything.
When he was in the United States he resented the capitalist system which he thought was exploiting him and others like him.
He seemed to prefer the Soviet Union and he spoke highly of Cuba.
When he was in the Soviet Union, he apparently resented the Communist Party members,
who were accorded special privileges and who he thought were betraying communism, and he spoke well of the United States.
He accused his wife of preferring others to himself and told her to return to the Soviet Union without him but without a divorce.
At the same time he professed his love for her and said that he could not get along without her.
Marina Oswald thought that he would not be happy anywhere, quote, Only on the moon, perhaps, end quote.
While Oswald appeared to most of those who knew him as a meek and harmless person, he sometimes imagined himself as, quote, the Commander, end quote,
and, apparently seriously, as a political prophet -- a man who said that after 20 years he would be prime minister.
His wife testified that he compared himself with great readers of history.
Such ideas of grandeur were apparently accompanied by notions of oppression.
He had a great hostility toward his environment, whatever it happened to be,
which he expressed in striking and sometimes violent acts long before the assassination.
There was some quality about him that led him to act with an apparent disregard for possible consequences.
He defected to the Soviet Union, shot at General Walker, tried to go to Cuba and even contemplated hijacking an airplane to get there.
He assassinated the President, shot Officer Tippit, resisted arrest and tried to kill another policeman in the process.
Oswald apparently started reading about communism when he was about 15.
In the Marines, he evidenced a strong conviction as to the correctness of Marxist doctrine,
which one associate described as, quote, irrevocable, end quote, but also as, quote, theoretical, end quote,
That associate did not think that Oswald was a Communist.
Oswald did not always distinguish between Marxism and communism.
He stated several times that he was a Communist but apparently never joined any Communist Party.
His attachment to Marxist and Communist doctrine was probably, in some measure, an expression of his hostility to his environment.
While there is doubt about how fully Oswald understood the doctrine which he so often espoused, it seems clear
that his commitment to Marxism was an important factor influencing his conduct during his adult years.
It was an obvious element in his decision to go to Russia and later to Cuba and it probably influenced his decision to shoot at General Walker.
It was a factor which contributed to his character and thereby might have influenced his decision to assassinate President Kennedy.
The discussion below will describe the events known to the Commission which most clearly reveals the formation and nature of Oswald's character.
It will attempt to summarize the events of his early life, his experience in New York City and in the Marine Corps, and his interest in Marxism.
It will examine his defection to the Soviet Union in 1959, his subsequent return to the United States and his life here
after June of 1962.
The review of the latter period will evaluate his personal and employment relations, his attempt to kill General Walker, his political activities,
and his unsuccessful attempt to go to Cuba in late September of 1963.
Various possible motives will be treated in the appropriate context of the discussion outlined above.
The Early Years
Significant in shaping the character of Lee Harvey Oswald was the death of his father, a collector of insurance premiums.
This occurred 2 months before Lee was born in New Orleans on October 18, 1939.
That death strained the financial fortunes of the remainder of the Oswald family.
It had its effect on Lee's mother, Marguerite, his brother Robert, who had been born in 1934,
and his half-brother John Pic, who had been born in 1932 during Marguerite's previous marriage.
It forced Marguerite Oswald to go to work to provide for her family.
Reminding her sons that they were orphans and that the family's financial condition was poor,
she placed John Pic and Robert Oswald in an orphans' home.
From the time Marguerite Oswald returned to work until December 26, 1942, when Lee too was sent to the orphans' home,
he was cared for principally by his mother's sister, by babysitters and by his mother, when she had time for him.
Marguerite Oswald withdrew Lee from the orphans' home and took him with her to Dallas when he was a little over 4 years old.
About 6 months later she also withdrew John Pic and Robert Oswald.
Apparently that action was taken in anticipation of her marriage to Edwin A. Ekdahl, which took place in May of 1945.
In the fall of that year John Pic and Robert Oswald went to a military academy
where they stayed, except for vacations, until the spring of 1948.
Lee Oswald remained with his mother and Ekdahl, to whom he became quite attached.
John Pic testified that he thought Lee found in Ekdahl the father that he never had.
That situation, however, was short-lived,
for the relations between Marguerite Oswald and Ekdahl were stormy and they were finally divorced, after several separations and reunions,
in the summer of 1948.
After the divorce Mrs. Oswald complained considerably about how unfairly she was treated,
dwelling on the fact that she was a widow with three children.
John Pic, however, did not think her position was worse than that of many other people.
In the fall of 1948 she told John Pic and Robert Oswald
that she could not afford to send them back to the military school and she asked Pic to quit school entirely to help support the family.
which he did for 4 months in the fall of 1948.
In order to supplement their income further she falsely swore that Pic was 17 years old so that he could join the Marine Corps Reserves.
Pic did turn over part of his income to his mother,
but he returned to high school in January of 1949, where he stayed until 3 days before he was scheduled to graduate,
when he left school in order to get into the Coast Guard. Since his mother did not approve of his decision to continue school
he accepted the responsibility for that decision himself and signed his mother's name to all his own excuses and report cards.
Pic thought that his mother overstated her financial problems and was unduly concerned about money.
Referring to the period after the divorce from Ekdahl, which was apparently caused in part by Marguerite's desire to get more money from him,
Pic said, quote,
Lee was brought up in this atmosphere of constant money problems, and I am sure it had quite an effect on him, and also Robert, end quote.
Marguerite Oswald worked in miscellaneous jobs after her divorce from Ekdahl.
When she worked for a time as an insurance saleslady,
she would sometimes take Lee with her, apparently leaving him alone in the car while she transacted her business.
When she worked during the school year, Lee had to leave an empty house in the morning,
return to it for lunch and then again at night, his mother having trained him to do that rather than to play with other children.
An indication of the nature of Lee's character at this time was provided in the spring of 1950,
when he was sent to New Orleans to visit the family of his mother's sister, Mrs. Lillian Murret, for 2 or 3 weeks.
Despite their urgings, he refused to play with the other children his own age.
It also appears that Lee tried to tag along with his older brothers
but apparently was not able to spend as much time with them as he would have liked, because of the age gaps of 5 and 7 years,
which became more significant as the children grew older.
Whatever problems may have been created by Lee's home life in Louisiana and Texas,
he apparently adjusted well enough there to have had an average, although gradually deteriorating, school record
with no behavior or truancy problems.
That was not the case, however, after he and his mother moved to New York in August of 1952, shortly before Lee's 13th birthday.
They moved shortly after Robert joined the Marines; they lived for a time with John Pic who was stationed there with the Coast Guard.
Relations soon became strained, however, so in late September Lee and his mother moved to their own apartment in the Bronx.
Pic and his wife would have been happy to have kept Lee, however,
who was becoming quite a disciplinary problem for his mother, having struck her on at least one occasion.
The short-lived stay with the Pics was terminated after an incident in which Lee allegedly pulled out a pocket knife during an argument
and threatened to use it on Mrs. Pic.
When Pic returned home, Mrs. Oswald tried to play down the event but Mrs. Pic took a different view and asked the Oswalds to leave.
Lee refused to discuss the matter with Pic, whom he had previously idolized, and their relations were strained thereafter.
On September 30, 1952, Lee enrolled in P.S. 117
a junior high school in the Bronx, where the other children apparently teased him because of his, quote, western clothes and Texas accent.
He began to stay away from school, preferring to read magazines and watch television at home by himself.
This continued despite the efforts of the school authorities and, to a lesser extent, of his mother to have him return to school.
Truancy charges were brought against him alleging that he was, quote, beyond the control of his mother insofar as school attendance is concerned, end quote.
Oswald was remanded for psychiatric observation to Youth House, an institution in which children are kept for psychiatric observation
or for detention pending court appearance or commitment to a child-caring or custodial institution such as a training school.
He was in Youth House from April 16 to May 7, 1953,
during which time he was examined by its Chief Psychiatrist, Dr. Renatus Hartogs,
and interviewed and observed by other members of the Youth House staff.
Marguerite Oswald visited her son at Youth House, where she recalled that she waited in line, quote,
with Puerto Ricans and Negroes and everything, end quote.
She said that her pocketbook was searched, quote, because the children in this home were such criminals, dope fiends, and had been in criminal offenses,
that anybody entering this home had to be searched in case the parents were bringing cigarettes or narcotics or anything, end quote.
She recalled that Lee cried and said, quote, Mother, I want to get out of here.
There are children in here who have killed people, and smoke. I want to get out, end quote,
Marguerite Oswald said that she had not realized until then in what kind of place her son had been confined.
On the other hand, Lee told his probation officer, John Carro, that, quote,
while he liked Youth House, he missed the freedom of doing what he wanted. He indicated that he did not miss his mother, end quote.
Mrs. Evelyn D Siegel, a social worker who interviewed both Lee and his mother while Lee was confined in Youth House,
reported that Lee, quote, confided that the worse thing about Youth House was the fact that he had to be with other boys all the time,
was disturbed about disrobing in front of them, taking showers with them etc., end quote.
Contrary to reports that appeared after the assassination, the psychiatric examination did not indicate that Lee Oswald was a potential assassin,
potentially dangerous, that, quote, his outlook on life had strongly paranoid overtones, end quote, or that he should be institutionalized.
Dr. Hartogs did find Oswald to be a tense, withdrawn, and evasive boy who intensely disliked talking about himself and his feelings.
He noted that Lee liked to give the impression that he did not care for other people but preferred to keep to himself,
so that he was not bothered and did not have to make the effort of communicating.
Oswald's withdrawn tendencies and solitary habits were thought to be the result of, quote,
intense anxiety, shyness, feelings of awkwardness and insecurity, end quote.
He was reported to have said, quote, I don't want a friend and I don't like to talk to people, end quote, and, quote, I dislike everybody, end quote.
He was also described as having a, quote, Vivid fantasy life,
turning around the topics of omnipotence and power, through which he tries to compensate for his present shortcomings and frustrations, end quote.
Dr. Hartogs summarized his report by stating:
Quote, this 13 year old well built boy has superior mental resources and functions only slightly below his capacity level
in spite of chronic truancy from school which brought him into Youth House.
No finding of neurological impairment or psychotic mental changes could be made.
Lee has to be diagnosed as, quote, personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies, end quote.
Lee has to be seen as an emotionally, quite disturbed youngster
who suffers under the impact of really existing emotional isolation
and deprivation, lack of affection, absence of family life and rejection by a self involved and conflicted mother.
Dr. Hartogs recommended that Oswald be placed on probation on condition that he seek help and guidance through a child guidance clinic.
There, he suggested, Lee should be treated by a male psychiatrist who could substitute for the lack of a father figure.
He also recommended that Mrs. Oswald seek, quote, psychotherapeutic guidance through contact with a family agency, end quote.
The possibility of commitment was to be considered only if the probation plan was not successful.
Lee's withdrawal was also noted by Mrs. Siegel, who described him as a, quote, seriously detached, withdrawn youngster, end quote.
She also noted that there was, quote, a rather pleasant, appealing quality about this emotionally starved, affectionless youngster
which grows as one speaks to him, end quote.
She thought that he had detached himself from the world around him because, quote, no one in it ever met any of his needs for love, end quote.
She observed that since Lee's mother worked all day, he made his own meals and spent all his time alone
because he didn't make friends with the boys in the neighborhood. She thought that he, quote, withdrew into a completely solitary and detached existence
where he did as he wanted and he didn't have to live by any rules or come into contact with people, end quote.
Mrs. Siegel concluded that Lee, quote, just felt that his mother never gave a damn for him.
He always felt like a burden that she simply just had to tolerate, end quote.
Lee confirmed some of those observations by saying that he felt almost as if there were a veil between him and other people
through which they could not reach him, but that he preferred the veil to remain intact.
He admitted to fantasies about being powerful and sometimes hurting and killing people, but refused to elaborate on them.
He took the position that such matters were his own business.
A psychological human figure-drawing test corroborated the interviewer's findings that Lee was insecure and had limited social contacts.
Irving Sokolow, a Youth House psychologist reported that, quote,
The Human Figure Drawings are empty, poor characterizations of persons approximately the same age as the subject.
They reflect a considerable amount of impoverishment in the social and emotional areas.
He appears to be a somewhat insecure youngster exhibiting much inclination for warm and satisfying relationships to others.
There is some indication that he may relate to men more easily than to women in view of the more mature conceptualisation.
He appears slightly withdrawn and in view of the lack of detail within the drawings this may assume a more significant characteristic.
He exhibits some difficulty in relationship to the maternal figure suggesting more anxiety in this area than in any other.
Lee scored an IQ of 118 on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children.
According to Sokolow, this indicated a, quote, present intellectual functioning in the upper range of bright normal intelligence, end quote.
Sokolow said that although Lee was, quote, presumably disinterested in school subjects he operates on a much higher than average level, end quote.
On the Monroe Silent Reading Test, Lee's score indicated no retardation in reading speed and comprehension;
he had better than average ability in arithmetical reasoning for his age group.
Lee told Carro, his probation officer, that he liked to be by himself because he had too much difficulty in making friends.
The reports of Carro and Mrs. Siegel also indicate an ambivalent attitude toward authority on Oswald's part.
Carro reported that Lee was disruptive in class after he returned to school on a regular basis in the fall of 1953.
He had refused to salute the flag and was doing very little, if any, work.
It appears that he did not want to do any of the things which the authorities suggested in their efforts to bring him out of the shell
into which he appeared to be retreating.
He told Mrs. Siegel that he would run away if sent to a boarding school.
On the other hand he also told her that he wished his mother had been more firm with him in her attempts to get him to return to school.
The reports of the New York authorities indicate that Lee's mother gave him very little affection and did not serve as any sort of substitute for a father.
Furthermore she did not appear to understand her own relationship to Lee's psychological problems.
After her interview with Mrs. Oswald,
Mrs. Siegel described her as a smartly dressed, gray haired woman, very self-possessed and alert and superficially affable,
but essentially a, quote, defensive, rigid, self-involved person
who had real difficulty in accepting and relating to people, end quote, and who had, quote, little understanding, end quote, of Lee's behavior
and of the, quote, protective shell he has drawn around himself, end quote. Dr. Hartogs reported that Mrs. Oswald did not understand
that Lee's withdrawal was a form of, quote, violent but silent protest against his neglect by her
and represents his reaction to a complete absence of any real family life, end quote.
Carro reported that when questioned about his mother Lee said, quote,
well I've got to live with her. I guess I love her, end quote.
It may also be significant that, as reported by John Pic, quote, Lee slept with my mother until I joined the service in 1950.
This would make him approximately 10, well, almost 11 years old. End quote.
The factors in Lee Oswald's personality which were noted by those who had contact with him in New York indicate
that he had great difficulty in adapting himself to conditions in that city.
His usual reaction to the problems which he encountered there was simply withdrawal.
Those factors indicated a severe inability to enter into relationships with other people.
In view of his experiences when he visited his relatives in New Orleans in the spring of 1950, and his other solitary habits,
Lee had apparently been experiencing similar problems before going to New York,
and as will be shown below, this failure to adapt to his environment was a dominant trait in his later life.
It would be incorrect, however, to believe that those aspects of Lee's personality which were observed in New York
could have led anyone to predict the outburst of violence which finally occurred.
Carro was the only one of Oswald's three principal observers who recommended that he be placed in a boy's home or similar institution.
But Carro was quite specific that his recommendation was based primarily on the adverse factors in Lee's environment
his lack of friends, the apparent unavailability of any agency assistance and the ineffectualness of his mother
and not on any particular mental disturbance, in the boy himself.
Carro testified that, quote, There was nothing that would lead me to believe when I saw him at the age of 12 that them would be seeds of destruction for somebody.
I couldn't in all honesty sincerely say such a thing.
Mrs. Siegel concluded her report with the statement that, quote,
Despite his withdrawal, he gives the impression that he is not so difficult to reach as he appears and patient, prolonged effort
in a sustained relationship with one therapist might bring results.
There are indications that he has suffered serious personality damage but if he can receive help quickly this might be repaired to some extent, end quote.
Lee Oswald never received that help.
Few social agencies even in New York were equipped to provide the kind of intensive treatment that he needed,
and when one of the city's clinics did find room to handle him,
for some reason the record does not show, advantage was never taken of the chance afforded to Oswald.
When Lee became a disciplinary problem upon his return to school in the fall of 1953,
and when his mother failed to cooperate in any way with school authorities,
authorities were finally forced to consider placement in a home for boys.
Such a placement was postponed, however, perhaps in part at least because Lee's behavior suddenly improved.
Before the court took any action, the Oswalds left New York in January of 1954,
and returned to New Orleans where Lee finished the ninth grade before he left school to work for a year.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 2.
Return to New Orleans and Joining the Marine Corps
After his return to New Orleans Oswald was teased at school because of the northern accent which he had acquired.
He concluded that school had nothing to offer him.
His mother exercised little control over him and thought he could decide for himself whether to go on in school.
Neighbors and others who knew him at that time recall an introverted boy who read a great deal.
He took walks and visited museums, and sometimes rode a rented bicycle in the park on Saturday mornings.
Mrs. Murret believes that he talked at length with a girl on the telephone, but no one remembers that he had any dates.
A friend, Edward Voebel, testified that, quote, he was more bashful about girls than anything else, end quote.
Several witnesses testified that Lee Oswald was not aggressive. He was, however, involved in some fights.
Once a group of white boys beat him up for sitting in the Negro section of a bus, which he apparently did simply out of ignorance.
Another time, he fought with two brothers who claimed that he had picked on the younger of them, 3 years Oswald's junior.
Two days later, quote, some big guy, probably from a high school -- he looked like a tremendous football player, end quote,
accosted Oswald on the way home from school and punched him in the mouth, making his lip bleed and loosening a tooth.
Voebel took Oswald back to the school to attend to his wounds, and their, quote, mild friendship, end quote, stemmed from that incident.
Voebel also recalled that Oswald once outlined a plan to cut the glass in the window of a store on Rampart Street and steal a pistol,
but he was not sure then that Oswald meant to carry out the plan, and in fact they never did.
Voebel said that Oswald, quote, wouldn't start any fights, but if you wanted to start one with him, he was going to make sure that he ended it,
or you were going to really have one, because he wasn't going to take anything from anybody, end quote.
In a space for the names of, quote, close friends, end quote, on the ninth grade personal history record,
Oswald first wrote, quote, Edward Vogel, end quote, an obvious misspelling of Voebel's name,
and, quote, Arthor Abear, end quote, most likely Arthur Hebert, a classmate who has said that he did not know Oswald well.
Oswald erased those names, however, and indicated that he had no close friends.
It has been suggested that this misspelling of names, apparently on a phonetic basis, was caused by a reading-spelling disability
from which Oswald appeared to suffer.
Other evidence of the existence of such a disability is provided by the many other misspellings that appear in Oswald's writings, portions of which are quoted below.
Sometime during this period, and under circumstances to be discussed more fully below,
Oswald started to read Communist literature, which he obtained from the public library.
One of his fellow employees, Palmer McBride, stated that Oswald said he would like to kill President Eisenhower because he was exploiting the working class.
Oswald praised Khrushchev and suggested that he and McBride join the Communist Party, quote, to take advantage of their social functions, end quote.
Oswald also became interested in the New Orleans Amateur Astronomy Association, an organization of high school students.
The association's then president, William E. Wulf, testified that he remembered an occasion when Oswald, quote,
started expounding the Communist doctrine and saying that he was highly interested in communism, that communism was the only way of life for the worker, et cetera,
and then came out with a statement that he was looking for a Communist cell in town to join but he couldn't find any.
He was a little dismayed at this, and he said that he couldn't find any that would show any interest in him as a Communist,
and subsequently, after this conversation, my father came in and we were kind of arguing back and forth about the situation, and my father came in the room,
heard what we were arguing on communism, and that this boy was loud-mouthed, boisterous, and my father asked him to leave the house and politely put him out of the house,
and that is the last I have seen or spoken with Oswald. End quote.
Despite this apparent interest in communism, Oswald tried to join the Marines when he was 16 years old.
This was 1 year before his actual enlistment and just a little over 2.5 years after he left New York.
He wrote a note in his mother's name to school authorities in New Orleans saying that he was leaving school because he and his mother were moving to San Diego.
In fact, he had quit school in an attempt to obtain his mother's assistance to join the Marines.
While he apparently was able to induce his mother to make a false statement about his age
he was nevertheless unable to convince the proper authorities that he was really 17 years old.
There is evidence that Oswald was greatly influenced in his decision to join the Marines by the fact that his brother Robert had done so
approximately 3 years before. Robert Oswald had given his Marine Corps manual to his brother Lee,
who studied it during the year following his unsuccessful attempt to enlist until, quote, He knew it by heart, end quote.
According to Marguerite Oswald, quote, Lee lived for the time that he would become 17 years old to join the Marines -- that whole year, end quote.
In John Pic's view,
Oswald was motivated to join the Marines in large part by a desire, quote, to get from out and under the yoke of oppression from my mother, end quote.
Oswald's inability or lack of desire to enter into meaningful relationships with other people
continued during this period in New Orleans (1954 to 1956).
It probably contributed greatly to the general dissatisfaction which he exhibited with his environment,
a dissatisfaction which seemed to find expression at this particular point
in his intense desire to join the Marines and get away from his surroundings and his mother.
His study of Communist literature,
which might appear to be inconsistent with his desire to join the Marines, could have been another manifestation of Oswald's rejection of his environment.
His difficulty in relating to other people and his general dissatisfaction with the world around him continued while he was in the Marine Corps.
Kerry Thornley, a marine associate,
who, shortly after Oswald's defection, wrote an as yet unpublished novel based in considerable part on Oswald's life,
testified that, quote, definitely the Marine Corps was not what he had expected it to be when he joined, end quote,
He said that Oswald, quote, seemed to guard against developing real close friendships, end quote,
Daniel Powers, another marine who was stationed with Oswald for part of his marine career,
testified that Oswald seemed, quote, always to be striving for a relationship, but whenever he did
his general personality would alienate the group against him, end quote.
Other marines also testified that Oswald had few friends and kept very much to himself.
While there is nothing in Oswald's military records to indicate that he was mentally unstable or otherwise psychologically unfit for duty in the Marine Corps,
he did not adjust well to conditions which he found in that service.
He did not rise above the rank of private first class, even though he had passed a qualifying examination for the rank of corporal.
His Marine career was not helped by his attitude
that he was a man of great ability and intelligence and that many of his superiors in the Marine Corps were not sufficiently competent to give him orders.
While Oswald did not seem to object to authority in the abstract, he did think that he should be the one to exercise it.
John E. Donovan, one of his former officers, testified that Oswald thought, quote,
that authority, particularly the Marine Corps, ought to be able to recognize talent such as his own, without a given magic college degree,
and put them in positions of prominence, end quote. Oswald manifested this feeling about authority by baiting his officers.
He led them into discussions of foreign affairs about which they often knew less than he did, since he had apparently devoted considerable time to a study of such matters.
When the officers were unable to discuss foreign affairs satisfactorily with him, Oswald regarded them as unfit to exercise command over him.
Nelson Delgado, one of Oswald's fellow Marines, testified that Oswald tried to, quote, cut up anybody that was high ranking, end quote,
in those arguments, quote, and make himself come out top dog, end quote.
Oswald probably engaged his superiors in arguments on a subject that he had studied
in an attempt to attract attention to himself and to support his exaggerated idea of his own abilities.
Thornley also testified that he thought that Oswald's extreme personal sloppiness in the Marine Corps, quote,
fitted into a general personality pattern of his: to do whatever was not wanted of him, a recalcitrant trend in his personality, end quote,
Oswald, quote, seemed to be a person who would go out of his way to get into trouble, end quote,
and then used the, quote, special treatment, end quote, he received as an example of the way in which he was being picked on and, quote,
as a means of getting or attempting to get sympathy, end quote. In Thornley's view, Oswald labored under a persecution complex
which he strove to maintain and, quote, felt the Marine Corps kept a pretty close watch on him because of his subversive activities, end quote.
Thornley added, quote, I think it was kind of necessary to him to believe that he was being picked on.
It wasn't anything extreme. I wouldn't go as far as to call it, call him a paranoid, but a definite tendency there was in that direction, I think, end quote.
Powers considered Oswald to be meek and easily led
an, quote, individual that you would brainwash, and quite easy, but I think once he believed in something, he stood in his beliefs, end quote.
Powers also testified that Oswald was reserved and seemed to be, quote, somewhat the frail, little puppy in the litter, end quote.
He had the nickname, quote, Ozzie Rabbit, end quote.
Oswald read a good deal, said Powers, but, quote, he would never be reading any of the shoot-em-up westerns or anything like that.
Normally, it would be a good type of literature; and the one that I recall was "Leaves of Grass," by Walt Whitman, end quote.
According to Powers, Oswald said, quote,
All the Marine Corps did was to teach you to kill and after you got out of the Marines you might be good gangsters, end quote.
Powers believed that when Oswald arrived in Japan he acquired a girlfriend, quote,
finally attaining a male status or image in his own eyes, end quote. That apparently caused Oswald to become more self-confident,
aggressive and even somewhat pugnacious, although Powers, quote, wouldn't say that this guy is a troublemaker, end quote.
Powers said, quote, now he was Oswald the man rather than Oswald the rabbit, end quote.
Oswald once told Powers that he didn't care if he returned to the United States at all.
While in Japan, Oswald's new found apparent self confidence and pugnaciousness
led to an incident in which he spilled a drink on one of his sergeants and abusively challenged him to fight.
At the court-martial hearing which followed, Oswald admitted that he had been rather drunk when the incident occurred.
He testified that he had felt the sergeant had a grudge against him and that he had unsuccessfully sought a transfer from the sergeant's unit.
He said that he had simply wanted to discuss the question with the sergeant and the drink had been spilled accidentally.
The hearing officer agreed with the latter claim but found Oswald guilty of wrongfully using provoking words and sentenced him to 28 days,
canceling the suspension of a 20-day sentence that Oswald had received in an earlier court-martial
for possessing an unauthorized pistol with which he had accidentally shot himself.
At his own request,
Oswald was transferred from active duty to the Marine Corps Reserve under honorable conditions in September of 1959,
3 months prior to his regularly scheduled separation date, ostensibly to care for his mother who had been injured in an accident at her work.
He was undesirably discharged from the Marine Corps Reserve, to which he had been assigned on inactive status following his transfer from active duty,
after it was learned that he had defected to the Soviet Union.
In an attempt to have this discharge reversed,
Oswald wrote to then Secretary of the Navy Connally on January 30, 1962,
stating that he would, quote, employ all means to right this gross mistake or injustice, end quote.
Governor Connally had just resigned to run for Governor of Texas, so he advised Oswald that he had forwarded the letter to his successor.
It is thus clear that Oswald knew that Governor Connally was never directly concerned with his discharge
and he must have known that President Kennedy had had nothing to do with it.
In that connection, it does not appear that Oswald ever expressed any dissatisfaction of any kind with either the President or Governor Connally.
Marina Oswald testified that she, quote, had never heard anything bad about Kennedy from Lee. And he never had anything against him, end quote.
Mrs. Oswald said that her husband did not say anything about Governor Connally after his return to the United States. She testified, quote,
But while we were in Russia he spoke well of him. Lee said that when he would return to the United States he would vote for him for Governor, end quote.
Oswald must have already learned that the Governor could not help him with his discharge because he was no longer Secretary of the Navy, at the time he made that remark.
Even though Oswald apparently did not express any hostility against the President or Governor Connally,
he continued to be concerned about his undesirable discharge. It is clear that he thought he had been unjustly treated.
Probably his complaint was due to the fact that his discharge was not related to anything he had done while on active duty
and also because he had not received any notice of the original discharge proceedings, since his whereabouts were not known.
He continued his efforts to reverse the discharge by petitioning the Navy Discharge Review Board,
which finally declined to modify the discharge and so advised him in a letter dated July 1963.
Governor Connally's connection with the discharge, although indirect, caused the Commission to consider whether he might have been Oswald's real target.
In that connection, it should be noted that Marina Oswald testified on September 6, 1964, that she thought her husband, quote,
was shooting at Connally rather than President Kennedy, end quote.
In support of her conclusion Mrs. Oswald noted her husband's undesirable discharge
and that she could not think of any reason why Oswald would want to kill President Kennedy.
It should be noted, however, that at the time Oswald fired the shots at the Presidential limousine the Governor occupied the seat in front of the President,
and it would have been almost impossible for Oswald to have hit the Governor without hitting the President first.
Oswald could have shot the Governor as the car approached the Depository or as it was making the turn onto Elm Street.
Once it had started down Elm Street toward the Triple Underpass, however,
the President almost completely blocked Oswald's view of the Governor prior to the time the first shot struck the President.
Oswald would have had other and more favorable opportunities to strike at the Governor than on this occasion when, as a member of the President's party,
he had more protection than usual. It would appear, therefore, that to the extent Oswald's undesirable discharge affected his motivation,
it was more in terms of a general hostility against the government and its representatives rather than a grudge against any particular person.
Interest in Marxism
As indicated above, Oswald started to read Communist literature after he and his mother left New York and moved to New Orleans.
He told Aline Mosby, a reporter who interviewed him after he arrived in Moscow, quote,
I'm a Marxist. I became interested about the age of 15. From an ideological viewpoint.
An old lady handed me a pamphlet about saving the Rosenbergs. I looked at that paper and I still remember it for some reason, I don't know why. End quote.
Oswald studied Marxism after he joined the Marines and his sympathies in that direction and for the Soviet Union appear to have been widely known,
at least in the unit to which he was assigned after his return from the Far East.
His interest in Russia led some of his associates to call him "comrade" or "Oswaldskovitch."
He always wanted to play the red pieces in chess because, as he said in an apparently humorous context,
he preferred the, quote, Red Army, end quote.
He studied the Russian language, read a Russian language newspaper and seemed interested in what was going on in the Soviet Union.
Thornley, who thought Oswald had an "irrevocable conviction" that his Marxist beliefs were correct, testified, quote,
I think you could sit down and argue with him for a number of years, and I don't think you could have changed his mind on that unless you knew why he believed it in the first place.
I certainly don't. I don't think with any kind of formal argument you could have shaken that conviction. And that is why I say irrevocable.
It was just -- never getting back to looking at things from any other way once he had become a Marxist, whenever that was, end quote.
Thornley also testified about an incident which grew
out of a combination of Oswald's known Marxist sympathies and George Orwell's book "1984," one of Oswald's favorite books
which Thornley read at Oswald's suggestion.
Shortly after Thornley finished reading that book the Marine unit to which both men were assigned was required to take part in a Saturday morning parade
in honor of some retiring noncommissioned officers, an event which they both approached with little enthusiasm.
While waiting for the parade to start they talked briefly about "1984"
even though Oswald seemed to be lost in his own thoughts. After a brief period of silence Oswald remarked on the stupidity of the parade
and on how angry it made him, to which Thornley replied, quote, Well, comes the revolution you will change all that, end quote.
Thornley testified, quote, At which time he looked at me like a betrayed Caesar and screamed, screamed definitely, "Not you, too, Thornley!"
And I remember his voice cracked as he said this. He was definitely disturbed at what I had said and I didn't really think I had said that much.
I never said anything to him again and he never said anything to me again, end quote.
Thornley said that he had made his remark only in the context of "1984"
and had not intended any criticism of Oswald's political views which is the way in which, Thornley thought, Oswald took his remarks.
Lieutenant Donovan testified that Oswald thought that, quote, there were many grave injustices concerning the affairs in the international situation, end quote.
He recalled that Oswald had a specific interest in Latin America, particularly Cuba,
and expressed opposition to the Batista regime and sympathy for Castro, an attitude which, Donovan said, was, quote,
not unpopular, end quote, at that time. Donovan testified
that he never heard Oswald express a desire personally to take part in the elimination of injustices anywhere in the world and that he, quote,
never heard him in any way, shape or form confess that he was a Communist, or that he ever thought about being a Communist, end quote.
Delgado testified that Oswald was, quote, a complete believer that our way of government was not quite right, end quote.
and believed that our Government did not have, quote, too much to offer, end quote, but was not in favor of, quote, the Communist way of life, end quote.
Delgado and Oswald talked more about Cuba than Russia, and sometimes imagined themselves as leaders in the Cuban Army or Government,
who might, quote, lead an expedition to some of these other islands and free them too, end quote.
Thornley also believed that Oswald's Marxist beliefs led to an extraordinary view of history under which, quote, He looked upon the eyes of future people
as some kind of tribunal,
and he wanted to be on the winning side so that 10,000 years from-now people would look in the history books and say, "Well, this man was ahead of his time."
The eyes of the future became the eyes of God.
He was concerned with his image in history and I do think that is why he chose the particular method of defecting he chose and did it in the way he did.
It got him in the newspapers. It did broadcast his name out, end quote.
Thornley thought that Oswald not only wanted a place in history but also wanted to live comfortably in the present.
He testified that if Oswald could not have that, quote, degree of physical comfort that he expected or sought,
I think he would then throw himself entirely on the other thing he also wanted, which was the image in history.
I think he wanted both if he could have them. If he didn't, he wanted to die with the knowledge that, or with the idea that he was somebody, end quote.
Oswald's interest in Marxism led some people to avoid him,
even though as his wife suggested, that interest may have been motivated by a desire to gain attention. He used his Marxist and associated activities
as excuses for his difficulties in getting along in the world, which were usually caused by entirely different factors.
His use of those excuses to present himself to the world as a person who was being unfairly treated
is shown most clearly by his employment relations after his return from the Soviet Union. Of course, he made his real problems worse to the extent
that his use of those excuses prevented him from discovering the real reasons for and attempting to overcome his difficulties.
Of greater importance,
Oswald's commitment to Marxism contributed to the decisions which led him to defect to the Soviet Union in 1959, and later
to engage in activities on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in the summer of 1963,
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald:
Background and Possible Motives, Part 3.
Defection to the Soviet Union
After Oswald left the Marine Corps in September of 1959, ostensibly to care for his mother,
he almost immediately left for the Soviet Union where he attempted to renounce his citizenship.
At the age of 19, Oswald thus committed an act which was the most striking indication he had yet given
of his willingness to act on his beliefs in quite extraordinary ways.
While his defection resulted in part from Oswald's commitment to Marxism,
it appears that personal and psychological factors were also involved.
On August 17, 1963, Oswald told Mr. William Stuckey,
who had arranged a radio debate on Oswald's activities on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee,
that while he had begun to read Marx and Engels at the age of 15, the conclusive thing that made him decide that Marxism was the answer
was his service in Japan.
He said living conditions over there convinced him something was wrong with the system, and that possibly Marxism was the answer.
He said it was in Japan that he made up his mind to go to Russia
and see for himself how a revolutionary society operates, a Marxist society.
On the other hand, at least one person who knew Oswald after his return thought that his defection had a more personal and psychological basis.
The validity of the latter observation is borne out by some of the things Oswald wrote in connection with his defection
indicating that his motivation was at least in part a personal one. On November 26, 1959,
shortly after he arrived in the Soviet Union, and probably before Soviet authorities had given him permission to stay indefinitely,
he wrote to his brother Robert that the Soviet Union was a country which, quote, I have always considered to be my own, end quote,
and that he went there, quote, only to find freedom. I could never have been personally happy in the U.S., end quote.
He wrote in another letter that he would, quote, never return to the United States which is a country I hate, end quote.
His idea that he was to find, quote, freedom, end quote, in the Soviet Union was to be rudely shattered.
Whatever Oswald's reasons for going to the Soviet Union might have been, however, there can be little doubt that his desire to go was quite strong.
In addition to studying the Russian language while he was in the Marines,
Oswald had managed to save enough money to cover the expenses of his forthcoming trip.
While there is no proof that he saved $1,500, as he claimed,
it would have taken considerable discipline to save whatever amount was required to finance his defection out of the salary of a low ranking enlisted man.
The extent of Oswald's desire to go to the Soviet Union
and of his initial commitment to that country can best be understood, however, in the context
of his concomitant hatred of the United States, which was most clearly expressed in his November 26,
and communist's would like to see the present capitalist government of the U.S. overthrown, end quote, Oswald stated
that that government supported an economic system, quote, which exploits all its workers, end quote,
and under which, quote, art, culture and the sprit of man are subjected to commercial enterprising,
and religion and education are used as a tool to suppress what would otherwise be a population questioning their government's unfair
economic system and plans for war, end quote.
He complained in his letter about segregation,
unemployment, automation, and the use of military forces to suppress other populations.
Asking his brother why he supported the American Government and what ideals he put forward, Oswald wrote, quote,
Ask me and I will tell you I fight for communism.
I will not say your grandchildren will live under communism, look for yourself at history, look at a world map! America is a dicing country,
I do not wish to be a part of it, nor do I ever again wish to be used as a tool in its military aggressions.
This should answer your question, and also give you a glimpse of my way of thinking. So you speak of advantages. Do you think that is why I am here?
For personal, material advantages? Happiness is not based on oneself, it does not consist of a small home, of taking and getting,
Happiness is taking part in the struggle, where there is no borderline between one's own personal world, and the world in general.
I never believed I would find more material advantages at this stage of development in the Soviet Union than I might of had in the U.S.
I have been a pro-communist for years and yet I have never met a communist, instead I kept silent and observed,
and what I observed plus my Marxist learning brought me here to the Soviet Union.
I have always considered this country to be my own. End quote.
Responding to Robert's statement that he had not "renounced" him,
Oswald told his brother, quote, on what terms I want this arrangement, end quote. He advised Robert that: 1.
In the event of war I would kill any American who put a uniform on in defense of the American government -- any American.
2. That in my own mind I have no attachments of any kind in the U.S.
3. That I want to, and I shall, live a normal happy and peaceful life here in the Soviet Union for the rest of my life.
That my mother and you are (in spite of what the newspaper said) not objects of affection, but only examples of workers in the U.S.
Despite this commitment to the Soviet Union
Oswald met disappointments there just as he had in the past. At the outset the Soviets told him that he could not remain.
It seems that Oswald immediately attempted suicide -- a striking indication of how much he desired to remain in the Soviet Union.
It shows how willing he was to act dramatically and decisively when he faced an emotional crisis
with few readily available alternatives at hand. He was shocked to find that the Soviet Union did not accept him with open arms.
The entry in his self-styled, quote, Historic Diary, end quote, for October 21, 1959, reports, quote,
I am shocked! My dreams! I have waited for 2 years to be accepted.
My fondest dreams are shattered because of a petty official. I decide to end it.
Soak fist in cold water to numb the pain. Then slash my left wrist. Than plunge wrist into bathtub of hot water.
Somewhere, a violin plays, as I watch my life whirl away.
I think to myself "How easy to Die" and "A Sweet Death, (to violins), end quote.
Oswald was discovered in time to thwart his attempt at suicide.
He was taken to a hospital in Moscow where he was kept until October 28, 1959.
Still intent, however, on staying in the Soviet Union,
Oswald went on October 31, to the American Embassy to renounce his U.S. citizenship.
Mr. Richard E. Snyder, then Second Secretary and senior consular official at the Embassy,
testified that Oswald was extremely sure of himself and seemed, quote, to know what his mission was.
He took charge, in a sense, of the conversation right from the beginning, end quote. He presented the following signed note:
Quote, I Lee Harvey Oswald do hereby request that my present citizenship in the United States of America, be revoked.
I have entered the Soviet Union for the express purpose of applying for citizenship in the Soviet Union, through the means of naturalization.
My request for citizenship is now pending before the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. I take these steps for political reasons.
My request for the revoking of my American citizenship
is made only after the longest and most serious considerations. I affirm that my allegiance is to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
End quote. As his, quote, principal reason, end quote, for renouncing his citizenship
Oswald stated, quote, I am a Marxist, end quote. He also alluded to hardships endured by his mother as a worker,
referring to them as experiences that he did not intend to have himself, even though he stated that he had never held a civilian job.
He said that his Marine service in Okinawa and elsewhere had given him, quote, a chance to observe American imperialism, end quote.
but he also displayed some sensitivity at not having reached a higher rank in the Marine Corps.
He stated that he had volunteered to give Soviet officials any information that he had concerning Marine Corps operations, and intimated
that he might know something of special interest. Oswald's "Historic Diary" describes the event in part as follows, quote,
I leave Embassy, elated at this showdown, returning to my hotel I feel now my energies are not spent in vain.
I'm sure Russians will accept me after this sign of my faith in them, end quote.
The Soviet authorities finally permitted Oswald to remain in their country.
No evidence has been found that they used him for any particular propaganda or other political or informational purposes.
They sent him to Minsk to work in a radio and television factory as a metal worker.
The Soviet authorities denied Oswald permission
to attend a university in Moscow, but they gave him a monthly allowance of 700 rubles a month
(old exchange rate) in addition to his factory salary of approximately equal amount
and considerably better living quarters than those accorded to Soviet citizens of equal age and station.
The subsidy, apparently similar to those sometimes given to foreigners allowed to remain in the Soviet Union, together with his salary,
gave Oswald an income which he said approximated that of the director of the factory in which he worked.
Even though he received more money and better living quarters than other Russians doing similar work,
he envied his wife's uncle, a colonel in the MVD, because of the larger apartment in which he lived.
Reminiscent of his attitude toward his superiors in the Marine Corps,
Oswald apparently resented the exercise of authority over him and the better treatment afforded to Communist Party officials.
After he returned to the United States
he took the position that the Communist Party officials in the Soviet Union were opportunists who were betraying their positions for personal gain.
He is reported to have expressed the conclusion that they had, quote, fat stinking politicians over there just like we have over here, end quote.
Oswald apparently continued to have personal difficulties while he was in Minsk.
Although Marina Oswald told the Commission that her husband had good personal relationships in the Soviet Union, Katherine Ford,
one of the members of the Russian community in Dallas with which the Oswalds became acquainted upon their arrival in the United States,
stated that Mrs. Oswald told her everybody in Russia, quote, hated him, end quote.
Jeanne De Mohrenschildt, another member of that group,
said that Oswald told her that he had returned because, quote, I didn't find what I was looking for, end quote.
George De Mohrenschildt thought that Oswald must have become disgusted with life in the Soviet Union as the novelty
of the presence of an American wore off and he began to be less the center of attention.
The best description of Oswald's state of mind, however, is set forth in his own "Historic Diary."
Under the entry for May 1, 1960,
he noted that one of his acquaintances, quote, relates many things I do not know about the U.S.S.R.
I begin to feel uneasy inside, its true! End quote.
Under the entry for August to September of that year he wrote, quote,
As my Russian improves I become increasingly conscious of just what sort of a society I live in.
Mass gymnastics, compulsory afterwork meeting, usually political information meeting.
Compulsory attendance at lectures and the sending of the entire shop collective (except me) to pick potatoes on a Sunday, at a state collective farm
A "patriotic duty" to bring in the harvest. The opinions of the workers (unvoiced) are that it's a great pain in the neck:
they don't seem to be especially enthusiastic about any of the "collective" duties, a natural feeling.
I am increasingly aware of the presence, in all thing, of Lebizen, shop party secretary, fat, fortyish, and jovial on the outside.
He is a no-nonsense party regular.
Finally, the entry of January 4 to 31 of 1961, quote,
I am stating to reconsider my desire about staying. The work is drab. The money I get has nowhere to be spent.
No night clubs or bowling alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances. I have had enough.
Shortly thereafter, less than 18 months after his defection, about 6 weeks before he met Marina Prusakova,
Oswald opened negotiations with the U.S. Embassy in Moscow looking toward his return to the United States.
Return to the United States. In view of the intensity of his earlier commitment to the Soviet Union,
a great change must have occurred in Oswald's thinking to induce him to return to the United States.
The psychological effects of that change must have been highly unsettling. It should be remembered
that he was not yet 20 years old when he went to the Soviet Union with such high hopes and not quite 23 when he returned bitterly disappointed.
His attempt to renounce his citizenship had been an open expression of hostility against the United States and a profound rejection of his early life.
The dramatic break with society in America now had to be undone.
His return to the United States publicly testified to the utter failure of what had been the most important act of his life.
Marina Oswald confirmed the fact that her husband was experiencing psychological difficulties at the time of his return.
She said that, quote, immediately after coming to the United States, Lee changed. I did not know him as such a man in Russia, end quote.
She added that while he helped her as he had done before, he became more of a recluse, that, quote,
He was very irritable, sometimes for a trifle, end quote, and that, quote, Lee was very unrestrained and very explosive, end quote.
during the period from November 19, 1962 to March of 1963.
After the assassination she wrote that, quote,
In general, our family life began to deteriorate after we arrived in America.
Lee was always hot-tempered, and now this trait of character more and more prevented us from living together in harmony.
Lee became very irritable, and sometimes some completely trivial thing would drive him into a rage.
I myself do not have a particularly quiet disposition,
but I had to change my character a great deal in order to maintain a more or less peaceful family life. End quote.
Marina Oswald's judgment of her husband's state of mind may be substantiated by comparing material which he wrote in the Soviet Union
with what he wrote while on the way back to the United States and after his return.
While in the Soviet Union he wrote his longest and clearest piece of work, "The Collective."
This was a fairly coherent description of life in that country, basically centered around the radio and television factory in which he worked.
While it was apparently intended for publication in the United States, and is in many respects critical of certain aspects of life in the Soviet Union,
it appears to be the work of a fairly well organized person.
Oswald prefaced his manuscript with a short autobiographical sketch which reads in part as follows, quote,
Lee Harvey Oswald was born in October 1939 in New Orleans, Louisiana, the son of a Insurance Salesmen whose early death
left a far mean streak of independence brought on by neglect.
entering the US Marine corp at 17, this streak of independence was strengthened by exotic journeys to Japan,
the Philippines, and the scores of odd islands in the Pacific.
Immediately after serving out his 3 years in the U.S. Marine Corps, he abandoned his American life to seek a new life in the USSR.
Full of optimism and hope, he stood in Red Square in the Fall of 1959, vowing to see his chosen course through,
After, however, 2 years and a lot of growing up, I decided to return to the USA.
The Collective" contrasts sharply with material which Oswald seems to have written after he left the Soviet Union.|"The Collective" contrasts sharply with material which Oswald seems to have written after he left the Soviet Union. LJ042-0165|which appears to be more an expression of his own psychological condition than of a reasoned analysis.|which appears to be more an expression of his own psychological condition than of a reasoned analysis. LJ042-0166|The latter material expresses great hostility to both communism and capitalism. He wrote, that to a person knowing both of those systems, quote,|The latter material expresses great hostility to both communism and capitalism. He wrote, that to a person knowing both of those systems, quote, LJ042-0167|There can be no mediation between those systems as they exist today, and that person|There can be no mediation between those systems as they exist today, and that person LJ042-0168|He must be opposed to their basic foundations and representatives, end quote.|He must be opposed to their basic foundations and representatives, end quote. LJ042-0169|And yet, it is immature to take the sort of attitude which says, quote, a curse on both your houses! End quote.|And yet, it is immature to take the sort of attitude which says, quote, a curse on both your houses! End quote. LJ042-0170|There are two great representatives of power in the world,|There are two great representatives of power in the world, LJ042-0171|simply expressed, the left and right, and their offspring factions and concerns. Any practical attempt at one alternative|simply expressed, the left and right, and their offspring factions and concerns. Any practical attempt at one alternative LJ042-0172|must have as its nucleus the traditional ideological best of both systems, and yet be utterly opposed to both systems.|must have as its nucleus the traditional ideological best of both systems, and yet be utterly opposed to both systems. LJ042-0173|Such an alternative was to be opposed both to capitalism and communism because, quote,|Such an alternative was to be opposed both to capitalism and communism because, quote, LJ042-0174|No man, having known, having lived, under the Russian Communist and American capitalist system,|No man, having known, having lived, under the Russian Communist and American capitalist system, LJ042-0175|could possibly make a choice between them, there is no choice,|could possibly make a choice between them, there is no choice, LJ042-0176|One offers oppression, the other poverty. Both offer imperialistic injustice, tinted with two brands of slavery, end quote.|One offers oppression, the other poverty. Both offer imperialistic injustice, tinted with two brands of slavery, end quote. LJ042-0177|Oswald actually did attempt to formulate such an alternative which he planned to, quote, put forward, end quote, himself.|Oswald actually did attempt to formulate such an alternative which he planned to, quote, put forward, end quote, himself. LJ042-0178|He thought the new alternative would have its best chance to be accepted after, quote, conflict between the two world systems leaves the world country|He thought the new alternative would have its best chance to be accepted after, quote, conflict between the two world systems leaves the world country LJ042-0179|without defense or foundation of government, end quote,|without defense or foundation of government, end quote, LJ042-0180|after which the survivors would, quote, seek an alternative opposed to those systems which have brought them misery, end quote.|after which the survivors would, quote, seek an alternative opposed to those systems which have brought them misery, end quote. LJ042-0181|Oswald realized that, quote, their thinking and education will be steeped in the traditions of those systems|Oswald realized that, quote, their thinking and education will be steeped in the traditions of those systems LJ042-0182|and they would never accept a new order complete beyond their understanding, end quote.|and they would never accept a new order complete beyond their understanding, end quote. LJ042-0183|As a result he thought it would be, quote, necessary to oppose the old systems but at the same time support their cherished traditions, end quote.|As a result he thought it would be, quote, necessary to oppose the old systems but at the same time support their cherished traditions, end quote. LJ042-0184|Expanding on his ideas on how his alternative to communism and capitalism might be introduced, he wrote of a, quote, readily foreseeable|Expanding on his ideas on how his alternative to communism and capitalism might be introduced, he wrote of a, quote, readily foreseeable LJ042-0185|economic, political, or military crisis, internal or external,|economic, political, or military crisis, internal or external, LJ042-0186|which will bring about the final destruction of the capitalist system, and indicated that|which will bring about the final destruction of the capitalist system, and indicated that LJ042-0187|preparation in a special party could safeguard an independent course of action after the debacle, end quote.|preparation in a special party could safeguard an independent course of action after the debacle, end quote. LJ042-0188|which would achieve the goal, which was, quote, the emplacement of a separate, democratic, pure communist society|which would achieve the goal, which was, quote, the emplacement of a separate, democratic, pure communist society LJ042-0189|but one with union communes,|but one with union communes, LJ042-0190|democratic socializing of production, and without regard to the twisting apart of Marxism Marxist Communism by other powers.|democratic socializing of production, and without regard to the twisting apart of Marxism Marxist Communism by other powers. LJ042-0191|While, quote, resourcefulness and patient working towards the aforesaid goals|While, quote, resourcefulness and patient working towards the aforesaid goals LJ042-0192|are preferred rather than loud and useless manifestations of protest, end quote, Oswald went on to note, quote,|are preferred rather than loud and useless manifestations of protest, end quote, Oswald went on to note, quote, LJ042-0193|But these preferred tactics now may prove to be too limited in the near future,|But these preferred tactics now may prove to be too limited in the near future, LJ042-0194|they should not be confused with slowness, indecision or fear. Only the intellectually fearless could even be remotely attracted to our doctrine,|they should not be confused with slowness, indecision or fear. Only the intellectually fearless could even be remotely attracted to our doctrine, LJ042-0195|and yet this doctrine requires the utmost, utmost restraint, a state of being in itself majestic in power, end quote.|and yet this doctrine requires the utmost, utmost restraint, a state of being in itself majestic in power, end quote. LJ042-0196|Oswald's decided rejection of both capitalism and communism|Oswald's decided rejection of both capitalism and communism LJ042-0197|seemed to place him in a situation in which he could not live with satisfaction either in the United States or in the Soviet Union.|seemed to place him in a situation in which he could not live with satisfaction either in the United States or in the Soviet Union. LJ042-0198|The discussion above has already set forth examples of his expression of hatred for the United States.|The discussion above has already set forth examples of his expression of hatred for the United States. LJ042-0199|He also expressed hatred of the Soviet Union and of the Communist Party, U.S.A.,|He also expressed hatred of the Soviet Union and of the Communist Party, U.S.A., LJ042-0200|even though he later referred to the latter as, quote, trusted long time fighters for progress, end quote.|even though he later referred to the latter as, quote, trusted long time fighters for progress, end quote. LJ042-0201|He wrote, quote, The Communist Party of the United States has betrayed itself!|He wrote, quote, The Communist Party of the United States has betrayed itself! LJ042-0202|It has turned itself into the traditional lever of a foreign power to overthrow the government of the United States;|It has turned itself into the traditional lever of a foreign power to overthrow the government of the United States; LJ042-0203|not in the name of freedom or high ideals,|not in the name of freedom or high ideals, LJ042-0204|but in servile conformity to the wishes of the Soviet Union and in anticipation of Soviet Russia's complete domination of the American continent.|but in servile conformity to the wishes of the Soviet Union and in anticipation of Soviet Russia's complete domination of the American continent. LJ042-0205|There can be no sympathy for those who have turned the idea of communism into a vile curse to Western man.|There can be no sympathy for those who have turned the idea of communism into a vile curse to Western man. LJ042-0206|The Soviets have committed crimes unsurpassed even by their early day capitalist counterparts, the imprisonment of their own peoples,|The Soviets have committed crimes unsurpassed even by their early day capitalist counterparts, the imprisonment of their own peoples, LJ042-0207|with the mass extermination so typical of Stalin, and the individual suppression and regimentation under Khrushchev.|with the mass extermination so typical of Stalin, and the individual suppression and regimentation under Khrushchev. LJ042-0208|The deportations, the purposeful curtailment of diet in the consumer slighted population of Russia,|The deportations, the purposeful curtailment of diet in the consumer slighted population of Russia, LJ042-0209|the murder of history, the prostitution of art and culture, end quote.|the murder of history, the prostitution of art and culture, end quote. LJ042-0210|A suggestion that Oswald hated more than just capitalism and communism|A suggestion that Oswald hated more than just capitalism and communism LJ042-0211|is provided by the following, which was apparently written either on the ship coming back, or after his return from the Soviet Union, quote,|is provided by the following, which was apparently written either on the ship coming back, or after his return from the Soviet Union, quote, LJ042-0212|I have often wondered why it is that the communist, anarchist capitalist, and even the fascist and anarchist elements in American,|I have often wondered why it is that the communist, anarchist capitalist, and even the fascist and anarchist elements in American, LJ042-0213|always profess patriotism toward the land and the people, if not the government; although their ideals movements must surely lead|always profess patriotism toward the land and the people, if not the government; although their ideals movements must surely lead LJ042-0214|to the bitter destruction of all and everything. I am quite sure these people must hate not only the government|to the bitter destruction of all and everything. I am quite sure these people must hate not only the government LJ042-0215|but our, the people, culture, traditions, heritage, and very people itself, and yet|but our, the people, culture, traditions, heritage, and very people itself, and yet LJ042-0216|they stand up and piously pronounce themselves patriots, displaying their war medals that they gained in conflicts long past between themselves.|they stand up and piously pronounce themselves patriots, displaying their war medals that they gained in conflicts long past between themselves. LJ042-0217|I wonder what would happen it somebody was to stand up and say he was utterly opposed not only to the governments, but to the people,|I wonder what would happen it somebody was to stand up and say he was utterly opposed not only to the governments, but to the people, LJ042-0218|to the entire land and complete foundations of his society, end quote.|to the entire land and complete foundations of his society, end quote. LJ042-0219|Oswald demonstrated his thinking in connection with his return to the United States by preparing two sets of identical questions of the type which he might have thought|Oswald demonstrated his thinking in connection with his return to the United States by preparing two sets of identical questions of the type which he might have thought LJ042-0220|he would be asked at a press conference when he returned.|he would be asked at a press conference when he returned. LJ042-0221|With either great ambivalence, or cold calculation he prepared completely different answers to the same questions.|With either great ambivalence, or cold calculation he prepared completely different answers to the same questions. LJ042-0222|Judged by his other statements and writings, however, he appears to have indicated his true feelings in the set of answers first presented|Judged by his other statements and writings, however, he appears to have indicated his true feelings in the set of answers first presented LJ042-0223|and to have stated in the second what he thought would be least harmful to him as he resumed life in the United States.|and to have stated in the second what he thought would be least harmful to him as he resumed life in the United States. LJ042-0224|For example, in response to his questions about his decision to go to the Soviet Union, his first draft answered, quote,|For example, in response to his questions about his decision to go to the Soviet Union, his first draft answered, quote, LJ042-0225|as a mark of discuss and protest against American political policies in foreign countries, my personal sign of discontent|as a mark of discuss and protest against American political policies in foreign countries, my personal sign of discontent LJ042-0226|and horror at the misguided line of reasoning of the United States Government, end quote.|and horror at the misguided line of reasoning of the United States Government, end quote. LJ042-0227|His second answer was that he, quote, went as a citizen of the U.S. (as a tourist) residing in a foreign country which I have a perfect right to do.|His second answer was that he, quote, went as a citizen of the U.S. (as a tourist) residing in a foreign country which I have a perfect right to do. LJ042-0228|I went there to see the land, the people and how their system works, end quote.|I went there to see the land, the people and how their system works, end quote. LJ042-0229|To the question of, quote, Are you a Communist? End quote, he first answered "Yes,
basically, although I hate the USSR and socialist system I still think marxism can work under different circumstances, end quote.
His second answer to this question was, quote, No of course not,
I have never even know a communist, outside of the ones in the USSR but you can't help that, end quote.
His first set of questions and answers indicated his belief that there were no outstanding differences between the Soviet Union and the United States,
quote, except in the US, the living standard is a little higher.
Freedoms are about the same. Medical aid and the educational system in the USSR is better than in the USA, end quote.
In the second simulated transcript which ended with the statement, quote, Newspapers thank you, sir. You are a real patriot! End quote.
He apparently concluded that the United States offered, quote,
freedom of speech, travel outspoken opposition to unpopular policies, freedom to believe in god, end quote, while the Soviet Union did not.
Despite the hatred that Oswald expressed toward the Soviet Union after his residence there,
he continued to be interested in that country after he returned to the United States.
Soon after his arrival he wrote to the Soviet Embassy in Washington
requesting information on how to subscribe to Russian newspapers and magazines and asked for, quote,
Oswald subsequently did subscribe to several Soviet journals.
While Marina Oswald tried to obtain permission to return to the Soviet Union, she testified that she did so at her husband's insistence.
In July of 1963, Oswald also requested the Soviet Union to provide a visa for his return to that country.
In August of 1963, he gave the New Orleans police as a reason for refusing to permit his family to learn English,
that, quote, he hated America and he did not want them to become Americanized, and that his plans were to go back to Russia, end quote.
Even though his primary purpose probably was to get to Cuba,
He sought an immediate grant of visa on his trip to Mexico City in late September of 1963.
He also inquired about visas for himself and his wife
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald:
Background and Possible Motives, Part 4.
Personal Relations
Apart from his relatives, Oswald had no friends or close associates in Texas when he returned there in June of 1962,
and he did not establish any close friendships or associations, although it appears that he came to respect George De Mohrenschildt.
Somewhat of a nonconformist,
De Mohrenschildt was a peripheral member of the so-called Russian community, with which Oswald made contact through Mr. Peter Gregory,
a Russian-speaking petroleum engineer whom Oswald met as a result of his contact with the Texas Employment Commission office in Fort Worth.
Some of the members of that group saw a good deal of the Oswalds through the fall of 1963,
and attempted to help Mrs. Oswald particularly, in various ways. In general, Oswald did not like the members of the Russian community.
In fact, his relations with some of them, particularly George Bouhe, became quite hostile.
Part of the problem resulted from the fact that, as Jeanne De Mohrenschildt testified,
Oswald was, quote, very, very disagreeable and disappointed, end quote,
He also expressed considerable resentment at the help given to his wife by her Russian-American friends.
Jeanne De Mohrenschildt said, quote,
Marina had a hundred dresses given to her, and he objected to that lavish help, because Marina was throwing it into his face.
He was offensive with the people. And I can understand why, because that hurt him.
He could never give her what the people were showering on her no matter how hard he worked -- and he worked very hard, end quote.
The relations between Oswald and his wife became such that Bouhe wanted to "liberate" her from Oswald.
While the exact sequence of events is not clear because of conflicting testimony,
it appears that De Mohrenschildt and his wife actually went to Oswald's apartment early in November of 1962
and helped to move the personal effects of Marina Oswald and the baby.
Even though it appears that they may have left Oswald a few days before, it seems that he resisted the move as best he could.
He even threatened to tear up his wife's dresses and break all the baby things. According to De Mohrenschildt,
Oswald submitted to the inevitable, presumably because he was, quote, small, you know, and he was rather a puny individual, end quote,
De Mohrenschildt said that the whole affair made him nervous since he was, quote, interfering in other people's affairs, after all, end quote.
Oswald attempted to get his wife to come back and, over Bouhe's protest, De Mohrenschildt finally told him where she was.
De Mohrenschildt admitted that, quote,
If somebody did that to me, a lousy trick like that, to take my wife away, and all the furniture, I would be mad as hell, too.
I am surprised that he didn't do something worse, end quote.
After about a 2-week separation, Marina Oswald returned to her husband.
Bouhe thoroughly disapproved of this and as a result almost all communication between the Oswalds and members of the Russian community ceased.
Contacts with De Mohrenschildt and his wife did continue and they saw the Oswalds occasionally until the spring of 1963.
Shortly after his return from the Soviet Union, Oswald severed all relations with his mother;
he did not see his brother Robert from Thanksgiving of 1962 until November 23, 1963.
At the time of his defection, Oswald had said that neither his brother, Robert,
nor his mother were objects of his affection, quote, but only examples of workers in the U.S., end quote.
He also indicated to officials at the American Embassy in Moscow that his defection was motivated at least in part
by so-called exploitation of his mother by the capitalist system.
Consistent with this attitude
He first told his wife that he did not have a mother, but later admitted that he did but that, quote, he didn't love her very much, end quote.
When they arrived from the Soviet Union, Oswald and his family lived at first with his brother Robert.
The latter testified that they, quote, were just together again, end quote, as if his brother, quote, had not been to Russia, end quote.
He also said that he and his family got along well with Marina Oswald and enjoyed showing her American things.
After about a month with his brother,
Oswald and his family lived for a brief period with his mother at her urging, but Oswald soon decided to move out.
Marguerite Oswald visited her son and his family at the first apartment which he rented after his return, and tried to help them get settled there.
After she had bought some clothes for Marina Oswald and a highchair for the baby, Oswald emphatically told her to stop.
As Marguerite Oswald testified, quote,
he strongly put me in my place about buying things for his wife that he himself could not buy, end quote.
Oswald objected to his mother visiting the apartment
and became quite incensed with his wife when she would open the door for her in spite of his instructions to the contrary.
Oswald moved to Dallas on about October 8, 1962, without telling his mother where he was going.
He never saw or communicated with her in any way again until she came to see him after the assassination.
Even though Oswald cut off relations with his mother,
he attempted for the first time to learn something about his family background when he went to New Orleans in April of 1963.
He visited some of his father's elderly relatives and the cemetery where his father was buried in an effort to develop the facts of his genealogy.
While it does not appear that he established any new relationships as a result of his investigation, he did obtain a large picture of his father
from one of the elderly relatives with whom he spoke. Oswald's interest in such things presents a sharp contrast with his attitude
at the time of his defection, when he evidenced no interest in his father and hardly mentioned him, even when questioned.
Oswald's defection, his interest in the Soviet Union, and his activities on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee
not only caused him difficulties in his employment relations, but they also provided him with excuses for employment failures
which were largely of his own making.
Oswald experienced some difficulty finding employment. Perhaps this was partially because of his lack of any specific skill or training.
Some of his acquaintances, feeling that Oswald tried to impress people with the fact that he had lived and worked in Russia, were led to the belief
that his employment difficulties were caused by his telling prospective employers that he had last been employed in Minsk.
While he might have expected difficulty from such an approach, in fact
the evidence indicates that Oswald usually told his prospective employers and employment counselors that he had recently been discharged from the Marine Corps.
Oswald obtained a job in July of 1962 as a sheet metal worker with a company in Fort Worth.
His performance for that company was satisfactory.
Even though he told his wife that he had been fired, he voluntarily left on October 8, 1962, and moved to Dallas.
On October 9, 1962 he went to the Dallas office of the Texas Employment Commission
where he expressed a reluctance to work in the industrial field.
He indicated an interest in writing. An employment counselor testified, on the basis of a general aptitude test Oswald had taken,
that he had some aptitude in that area, quote, because the verbal score is high and the clerical score is high, end quote,
While that counselor found that he was qualified to handle many different types of jobs,
because of his need for immediate employment she attempted to obtain for him any job that was available at the time. Oswald made qualifying marks
in 19 of 23 categories included on the general aptitude examination and scored 127 on the verbal test, as compared
with 50 percent of the people taking it who score less than 100.
The counselor testified that there was some indication that Oswald was capable of doing college work
and noted that Oswald's verbal and clerical potential was, quote, outstanding, end quote.
Employment Commission records concerning Oswald stated, quote, Well-groomed & spoken,
business suit, alert replies -- Expresses self extremely well, end quote.
Oswald said that he hoped eventually to develop qualifications for employment as a junior executive
through a work-study program at a local college.
He indicated, however, that he would have to delay that program because of his immediate financial needs and responsibilities.
On October 11, 1962, the Employment Commission referred Oswald
to a commercial advertising photography firm in Dallas, where he was employed as a trainee starting October 12, 1962.
Even though Oswald indicated that he liked photographic work, his employer found that he was not an efficient worker.
He was not able to produce photographic work
which adhered with sufficient precision to the job specifications and as a result too much of his work had to be redone.
He also had difficulty in working with the other employees.
This was at least in part because of the close physical confines in which some of the work had to be done.
He did not seem to be able to make the accommodations necessary when people work under such conditions and as a result
became involved in conflicts, some of which were fairly heated, with his fellow employees.
In February or March of 1963,
it began to appear that Oswald was having considerable difficulty doing accurate work and in getting along with the other employees.
It appears that his discharge was hastened by the fact that he brought a Russian language newspaper to work.
It is not possible to tell whether Oswald did this to provide an excuse for his eventual discharge,
or whether he brought the Russian language newspaper with him one day after his other difficulties became clear.
It is possible that his immediate supervisor noticed the newspaper at that time because his attention had otherwise been drawn more directly to Oswald.
In any event, Oswald was discharged on April 6, 1963, ostensibly because of his inefficiency and difficult personality.
His supervisor admitted, however,
that while he did not fire Oswald because of the newspaper incident or even weigh it heavily in his decision, quote,
it didn't do his case any good, end quote.
Upon moving to New Orleans on April 24, 1963,
Oswald's employment problems became more difficult. He left his wife and child at the home of a friend, Mrs. Ruth Paine, of Irving, Texas.
In New Orleans he obtained work as a greaser and oiler of coffee processing machines for the William B. Reily Co.,
beginning May 10, 1963.
After securing this job and an apartment, Oswald asked his wife to join him.
Mrs. Paine brought Oswald's family to New Orleans.
Refusing to admit that he could only get work as a greaser,
Oswald told his wife and Mrs. Paine that he was working as a commercial photographer.
He lost his job on July 19, 1963, because his work was not satisfactory
and because he spent too much time loitering in the garage next door, where he read rifle and hunting magazines.
Oswald apparently concluded that his Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities were not related to his discharge.
The correctness of that conclusion is supported by the fact that he does not seem to have been publicly identified with that organization until August 9,
1963, almost a month after he lost his job.
His Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities, however, made it more difficult for him to obtain other employment.
A placement interviewer of the Louisiana Department of Labor
who had previously interviewed Oswald, saw him on television and heard a radio debate in which he engaged on August 21, 1963.
He consulted with his supervisor and, quote, it was determined that we should not undertake to furnish employment references for him, end quote.
Ironically, he failed to get a job in another photographic firm after his return to Dallas in October of 1963,
because the president of the photographic firm for which he had previously worked
told the prospective employer that Oswald was, quote, kinda peculiar sometimes and that he had some knowledge of the Russian language, end quote.
and that he, quote, may be a damn Communist. I can't tell you. If I was you, I wouldn't hire him, end quote.
The plant superintendent of the new firm testified that, one of the employees of the old firm, quote,
implied that Oswald's fellow employees did not like him because he was propagandizing
and had been seen reading a foreign newspaper, end quote.
As a result Oswald was not hired.
He subsequently found a job with the Texas School Book Depository for which he performed his duties satisfactorily.
Attack on General Walker
The Commission has concluded that on April 10, 1963,
Oswald shot at Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker (Resigned, U.S. Army),
demonstrating once again his propensity to act dramatically and, in this instance violently, in furtherance of his beliefs.
The shooting occurred 2 weeks before Oswald moved to New Orleans and a few days after he had been discharged by the photographic firm.
As indicated in chapter 4, Oswald had been planning his attack on General Walker for at least 1 and perhaps as much as 2 months.
He outlined his plans in a notebook and studied them at considerable length before his attack.
He also studied Dallas bus schedules to prepare for his later use of buses to travel to and from General Walker's house.
Sometime after March 27, but according to Marina Oswald, prior to April 10, 1963,
Oswald posed for two pictures
with his recently acquired rifle and pistol, a copy of the March 24, 1963, issue of the Worker,
and the March 11, 1963, issue of the Militant.
He told his wife that he wanted to send the pictures to the Militant and he also asked her to keep one of the pictures for his daughter, June.
Following his unsuccessful attack on Walker, Oswald returned home.
He had left a note for his wife telling her what to do in case he were apprehended, as well as his notebook and the pictures of himself holding the rifle.
She testified that she was agitated because she had found the note in Oswald's room,
where she had gone, contrary to his instructions, after she became, worried about his absence.
She indicated that she had no advance knowledge of Oswald's plans,
that she became quite angry when Oswald told her what he had done, and that she made him promise never to repeat such a performance.
She said that she kept the note to use against him, quote, if something like that should be repeated again, end quote.
When asked if Oswald requested the note back she testified that, quote, He forgot about it. But apparently
after he thought that what he had written in his book might be proof against him, and he destroyed it (the book), end quote.
She later gave the following testimony. Question:
After he brought the rifle home, then, he showed you the book?
Answer: Yes. Question: And you said it was not a good idea to keep this book? Answer: Yes.
Question: And then he burned the book?
Answer: Yes.
Question: Did you ask him why he had not destroyed the book before he actually went to shoot General Walker?
Answer: It never came to me, myself, to ask him that question.
Marina Oswald's testimony indicates that her husband was not particularly concerned about his continued possession of the most incriminating sort of evidence.
If he had been successful and had been apprehended even for routine questioning, his apartment would undoubtedly have been searched,
and his role would have been made clear by the evidence which he had left behind.
Leaving the note and picture as he did would seem to indicate that he had considered the possibility of capture.
Possibly he might have wanted to be caught, and wanted his involvement made clear if he was in fact apprehended.
Even after his wife told him to destroy the notebook
he removed at least some of the pictures which had been pasted in it and saved them among his effects, where they were found after the assassination.
His behavior was entirely consistent with his wife's testimony that, quote,
I asked him what for he was making all these entries in the book and he answered that he wanted to leave a complete record so that all the details would be in it.
I am guessing that perhaps he did it to appear to be a brave man in case he were arrested, but that is my supposition, end quote.
The attempt on General Walker's life deserves close attention in any consideration of Oswald's possible motive for the assassination
and the trail of evidence he left behind him on that occasion.
While there are differences between the two events as far as Oswald's actions and planning are concerned, there are also similarities that should be considered.
The items which Oswald left at home when he made his attack on Walker suggest a strong concern for his place in history.
If the attack had succeeded and Oswald had been caught, the pictures showing him with his rifle
and his Communist and Socialist Worker's Party newspapers would probably have appeared on the front pages of newspapers or magazines all over the country,
as, in fact, one of them did appear after the assassination.
The circumstances of the attack on Walker coupled with other indications that Oswald was concerned about his place in history
and with the circumstances surrounding the assassination, have led the Commission to believe
that such concern is an important factor to consider in assessing possible motivation for the assassination.
In any event, the Walker incident indicates that in spite of the belief among those who knew him that he was apparently not dangerous,
Oswald did not lack the determination and other traits required
to carry out a carefully planned killing of another human being and was willing to consummate such a purpose if he thought there was sufficient reason to do so.
Some idea of what he thought was sufficient reason for such an act may be found in the nature of the motive that he stated for his attack on General Walker.
Marina Oswald indicated that her husband had compared General Walker to Adolph Hitler.
She testified that Oswald said that General Walker, quote, was a very bad man, that he was a fascist,
that he was the leader of a fascist organization, and when I said that even though all of that might be true, just the same he had no right to take his life,
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 7.
Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 5.
Political Activities
Oswald's political activities after his return to the United States center around his interest in Cuba and in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Although, as indicated above, the Commission has been unable to find any credible evidence
that he was involved in any conspiracy, his political activities do provide insight into certain aspects of Oswald's character
and into his possible motivation for the assassination.
While it appears that he may have distributed Fair Play for Cuba Committee materials on one uneventful occasion in Dallas sometime during the period
April 6 to 24, 1963 Oswald's first public identification with that cause was in New Orleans.
There, in late May and early June of 1963, under the name Lee Osborne,
he had printed a handbill headed in large letters, quote,
Hands Off Cuba, end quote, an application form for, and a membership card in,
the New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
He first distributed his handbills and other material uneventfully in the vicinity of the U.S.S. Wasp,
which was berthed at the Dumaine Street wharf in New Orleans, on June 16, 1963.
He distributed literature in downtown New Orleans on August 9, 1963,
and was arrested because of a dispute with three anti-Castro Cuban exiles, and again on August 16, 1963.
Following his arrest, he was interviewed by the police, and at his own request, by an agent of the FBI.
On August 17, 1963, he appeared briefly on a radio program and on August 21, 1963,
he debated over radio station WDSU, New Orleans, with Carlos Bringuier,
one of the Cuban exiles who had been arrested with him on August 9. Bringuier claimed that on August 5, 1963,
Oswald had attempted to infiltrate an anti-Castro organization with which he was associated.
While Oswald publicly engaged in the activities described above, his, quote, organization, end quote, was a product of his imagination.
The imaginary president of the nonexistent chapter was named A. J. Hidell, the name that Oswald used when he purchased the assassination weapon.
Marina Oswald said she signed that name, apparently chosen because it rhymed with "Fidel,"
to her husband's membership card in the New Orleans chapter.
She testified that he threatened to beat her if she did not do so. The chapter had never been chartered by the national FPCC organization.
It appears to have been a solitary operation on Oswald's part in spite of his misstatements to the New Orleans police that it had 35 members,
5 of which were usually present at meetings which were held once a month.
Oswald's Fair Play for Cuba activities may be viewed as a very shrewd political operation
in which one man single handedly created publicity for his cause or for himself.
It is also evidence of Oswald's reluctance to describe events accurately
and of his need to present himself to others as well as to himself in a light more favorable than was justified by reality.
This is suggested by his misleading and sometime untruthful statements in his letters to Mr. V. T. Lee,
then national director of FPCC. In one of those letters, dated August 1, 1963,
Oswald wrote that an office which he had previously claimed to have rented for FPCC activities had been, quote,
promptly closed 3 days later for some obscure reasons by the renters,
they said something about remodeling, etc. I'm sure you understand, end quote.
He wrote that, quote, thousands of circulars were distributed, end quote.
and that he continued to receive inquiries through his post office box which he endeavored, quote, to keep answering to the best of my ability, end quote.
In his letter to V. T. Lee,
he stated that he was then alone in his efforts on behalf of FPCC, but he attributed his lack of support
to an attack by Cuban exiles in a street demonstration and being, quote, officialy cautioned, end quote, by the police.
events which, quote, robbed me of what support I had leaving me alone, end quote.
that anyone ever attacked any street demonstration in which Oswald was involved, except for the Bringuier incident mentioned above,
which occurred 8 days after Oswald wrote the above letter to V. T. Lee.
Bringuier, who seemed to be familiar with many anti-Castro activities in New Orleans, was not aware of any such incident.
Police reports also fail to reflect any activity on Oswald's part prior to August 9, 1963,
except for the uneventful distribution of literature at the Dumaine Street wharf in June.
Furthermore, the general tenor of Oswald's next letter to V. T. Lee,
in which he supported his report on the Bringuier incident with a copy of the charges made against him
and a newspaper clipping reporting the event, suggests that his previous story of an attack by Cuban exiles was at least greatly exaggerated.
While the legend, quote, FPCC, 544 Camp Street New Orleans, Louisiana, end quote,
was stamped on some literature that Oswald had in his possession at the time of his arrest in New Orleans,
extensive investigation was not able to connect Oswald with that address, although it did develop the fact
that an anti-Castro organization had maintained offices there for a period ending early in 1962.
The Commission has not been able to find any other indication that Oswald had rented an office in New Orleans.
In view of the limited amount of public activity on Oswald's part before August 9, 1963,
there also seems to be no basis for his claim that he had distributed, quote,
thousands, end quote, of circulars, especially since he had claimed to have printed only 2,000
and actually had only 1,000 printed.
In addition, there is no evidence that he received any substantial amount of materials from the national headquarters.
In another letter to V. T. Lee, dated August 17, 1963,
Oswald wrote that he had appeared on Mr. William Stuckey's 15-minute television program over WDSU-TV called, quote,
Latin American Focus, end quote,
as a result of which he was, quote, flooded with callers and invitations to debates, etc. as well as people interested in joining the F.P.C.C.
New Orleans branch, end quote.
WDSU has no program of any kind called, quote, Latin American Focus, end quote.
Stuckey had a radio program called, quote, Latin Listening Post, end quote,
on which Oswald was heard for less than 5 minutes on August 17, 1963.
It appears that Oswald had only one caller in response to all of his FPCC activities,
an agent of Bringuier's attempting to learn more about the true nature
of the alleged FPCC, quote, organization, end quote, in New Orleans.
Oswald's statements suggest that he hoped to be flooded with callers and invitations to debate.
This would have made him a real center of attention as he must have been when he first arrived in the Soviet Union
and as he was to some extent when he returned to the United States.
The limited notoriety that Oswald received as a result of the street fracas and in the subsequent radio debate
was apparently not enough to satisfy him. He exaggerated in his letters to V. T. Lee in an apparent attempt
to make himself and his activities appear far more important than they really were.
His attempt to express himself through his Fair Play for Cuba activities, however,
was greatly impeded by the fact that the radio debate over WDSU on August 21, 1963,
brought out the history of his defection to the Soviet Union.
The basic facts of the event were uncovered independently by William Stuckey, who arranged the debate, and Edward Butler,
executive director of the Information Council of the Americas, who also appeared on the program.
Oswald was confronted with those facts at the beginning of the debate and was so thrown on the defensive by this that he was forced to state that
Fair Play for Cuba was, quote, not at all Communist controlled regardless of the fact that I had the experience of living in Russia, end quote.
Stuckey testified that uncovering Oswald's defection was very important, quote,
I think that we finished him on that program because we had publicly linked the Fair Play for Cuba Committee
with a fellow who had lived in Russia for 3 years and who was an admitted Marxist.
The interesting thing, or rather the danger involved, was the fact that Oswald seemed like such a nice, bright boy
and was extremely believable before this. We thought the fellow could probably get quite a few members if he was really indeed serious about getting members.
We figured after this broadcast of August 21, why, that was no longer possible, end quote.
In spite of the fact that Oswald had been surprised and was on the defensive throughout the debate, according to Stuckey, quote,
Mr. Oswald handled himself very well, as usual, end quote.
Stuckey thought Oswald, quote, appeared to be a very logical, intelligent fellow, end quote, and, quote, was arrested by his cleancutness, end quote.
He did not think Oswald looked like the, quote, type, end quote, that he would have expected to find associating with a group such as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Stuckey thought that Oswald acted very much as would a young attorney.
Following the disclosure of his defection, Oswald sought advice from the Communist Party, U.S.A., concerning his Fair Play for Cuba activity.
He had previously sent, apparently unsolicited, to the Party newspaper, the Worker,
samples of his photographic work, offering to contribute that sort of service without charge.
The Worker replied, quote, Your kind offer is most welcomed and from time to time we shall call on you, end quote.
He later wrote to another official of the Worker, seeking employment, and mentioning the praise he had received for submitting his photographic work.
He presented Arnold Johnson, Gus Hall,
and Benjamin J. Davis honorary membership cards in his nonexistent New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee,
and advised them of some of his activities on behalf of the organization.
Arnold Johnson, director of the information and lecture bureau of the Communist Party, U.S.A., replied stating, quote,
It is good to know that movements in support of fair play for Cuba has developed in New Orleans as well as in other cities.
We do not have any organizational ties with the Committee, and yet there is much material that we issue from time to time that is important
for anybody who is concerned about developments in Cuba, end quote,
Marina Oswald said that such correspondence from people he considered important meant much to Oswald.
After he had begun his Cuban activity in New Orleans, quote,
he received a letter from somebody in New York, some Communist -- probably from New York -- I am not sure from where -- from some Communist leader and he was very happy,
he felt that this was a great man that he had received the letter from, end quote.
Since he seemed to feel that no one else understood his political views, the letter was of great value to him for it, quote, was proof
that there were people who understood his activity, end quote.
He anticipated that the full disclosure of his defection would hinder him in, quote, the struggle for progress and freedom in the United States, end quote.
into which Oswald, in his own words, had, quote, thrown himself. He sought advice from the central committee of the Communist Party, U.S.A.,
in a letter dated August 28, 1963, about whether he could, quote, continue to fight,
handicapped as it were, by my past record and compete with anti-progressive forces, above-ground or whether in your opinion
I should always remain in the background, i.e. underground, end quote.
Stating that he had used his "position" with what he claimed to be the local branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to, quote, foster communist ideals, end quote,
Oswald wrote that he felt that he might have compromised the FPCC and expressed concern lest, quote, Our opponents could use my background
of residence in the U.S.S.R. against any cause which I join, by association,
they could say the organization of which I am a member, is Russian controlled, etc, end quote.
In reply Arnold Johnson advised Oswald that, while as an American citizen he had a right to participate in such organizations as he wished, quote,
there are a number of organizations, including possibly Fair Play, which are of a very broad character,
and often it is advisable for some people to remain in the background, not underground, end quote.
By August of 1963, after a short 3 months in New Orleans, the city in which he had been born and had lived most of his early life,
Oswald had fallen on difficult times.
He had not liked his job as a greaser of coffee processing machinery and he held it for only a little over 2 months.
He had not found another job. His wife was expecting their second child in October and there was concern about the cost which would be involved.
His brief foray on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee had failed to win any support.
While he had drawn some attention to himself and had actually appeared on two radio programs, he had been attacked by Cuban exiles and arrested,
an event which his wife thought upset him and as a result of which, quote, he became less active, he cooled off a little, end quote.
More seriously, the facts of his defection had become known, leaving him open to almost unanswerable attack by those who opposed his views.
It would not have been possible to have followed Arnold Johnson's advice to remain in the background,
since there was no background to the New Orleans FPCC, quote, organization, end quote, which consisted solely of Oswald.
Furthermore, he had apparently not received any letters from the national headquarters of FPCC since May 29, 1963,
even though he had written four detailed letters since that time to Mr. V. T. Lee and had also kept the national headquarters informed
of each of his changes of mailing address.
Those events no doubt had their effects on Oswald.
Interest in Cuba
By August of 1963, Oswald had for some time been considering the possibility of leaving the United States again.
On June 24, 1963, he applied for a new passport
and in late June or early July he told his wife that he wanted to return to the Soviet Union with her. She said that he was extremely upset,
very unhappy, and that he actually wept when he told her that.
He said that nothing kept him in the United States, that he would not lose anything if he returned to the Soviet Union, that he wanted to be with her
and that it would be better to have less and not have to be concerned about tomorrow.
As a result of that conversation, Marina Oswald wrote the Soviet Embassy in Washington concerning a request she had first made
on February 17, 1963, for permission for herself and June to return to the Soviet Union.
While that first request, made according to Marina Oswald at her husband's insistence, specifically stated that Oswald was to remain in the United States,
she wrote in her letter of July 1963,
that things are improving due to the fact that my husband expresses a sincere wish to return together with me to the USSR. Unknown to his wife, however,
Oswald apparently enclosed a note with her letter of July in which
he requested the Embassy to rush his wife's entrance visa because of the impending birth of the second child but stated that, quote,
As for my return entrance visa please consider it separately. End quote.
Thus while Oswald's real intentions, assuming that they were known to himself, are not clear,
he may not have intended to go to the Soviet Union directly, if at all. It appears that he really wanted to go to Cuba.
In his wife's words, quote,
I only know that his basic desire was to get to Cuba by any means, and that all the rest of it was window dressing for that purpose. End quote.
Marina Oswald testified that her husband engaged in Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities, quote,
primarily for purposes of self-advertising.
He wanted to be arrested. I think he wanted to get into the newspapers, so that he would be known. End quote.
According to Marina Oswald, he thought that would help him when he got to Cuba.
He asked his wife to help him to hijack an airplane to get there, but gave up that scheme when she refused.
During this period Oswald may have practiced opening and closing the bolt on his rifle in a screened porch in his apartment.
In September he began to review Spanish.
He approved arrangements for his family to return to Irving, Texas, to live with Mrs. Ruth Paine.
On September 20, 1963, Mrs. Paine and her two children arrived in New Orleans from a trip to the East Coast
and left for Irving with Marina Oswald and June and most of the Oswalds' effects 3 days later.
While Marina Oswald knew of her husband's plan to go to Mexico and thence to Cuba if possible, Mrs. Paine was told that Oswald was going to Houston
and possibly to Philadelphia to look for work.
Oswald left for Mexico City on September 25, 1963, and arrived on September 27, 1963.
He went almost directly to the Cuban Embassy and applied for a visa to Cuba in transit to Russia.
Representing himself as the head of the New Orleans branch of the, quote, organization called Fair Play for Cuba, end quote,
he stated his desire that he should be accepted as a friend of the Cuban Revolution.
He apparently based his claim for a visa in transit to Russia
on his previous residence, his work permit for that country, and several unidentified letters in the Russian language.
The Cubans would not, however, give him a visa until he had received one from the Soviets, which involved a delay of several months.
When faced with that situation Oswald became greatly agitated, and although he later unsuccessfully attempted
to obtain a Soviet visa at the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City, he insisted that he was entitled to the Cuban visa because of his background,
partisanship, and personal activities on behalf of the Cuban government.
He engaged in an angry argument with the consul who finally told him that, quote, as far as he was concerned
he would not give him a visa, end quote, and that, quote,
a person like him (Oswald) in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm, end quote.
Oswald must have been thoroughly disillusioned when he left Mexico City on October 2, 1963.
In spite of his former residence in the Soviet Union and his Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities he had been rebuffed
by the officials of both Cuba and the Soviet Union in Mexico City.
Now there appeared to be no chance to get to Cuba, where he had thought he might find his communist ideal. The U.S. Government would not permit travel there
and as far as the performance of the Cubans themselves was concerned, he was, quote, disappointed at not being able to get to Cuba
and he didn't have any great desire to do so any more because he had run into, as he himself said -- into bureaucracy and red tape, end quote.
Oswald's attempt to go to Cuba
was another act which expressed his hostility toward the United States and its institutions as well as a concomitant attachment
to a country in which he must have thought were embodied the political principles to which he had been committed for so long.
It should be noted that his interest in Cuba seems to have increased along with the sense of frustration which must have developed
as he experienced successive failures in his jobs, in his political activity, and in his personal relationships.
In retrospect his attempt to go to Cuba or return to the Soviet Union may well have been Oswald's last escape hatch,
his last gambit to extricate himself from the mediocrity and defeat which plagued him throughout most of his life.
Oswald's activities with regard to Cuba raise serious questions as to how much he might have been motivated in the assassination
by a desire to aid the Castro regime, which President Kennedy so outspokenly criticized.
For example, the Dallas Times Herald of November 19, 1963,
prominently reported President Kennedy as having, quote, all but invited the Cuban people today to overthrow Fidel Castro's Communist regime
and promised prompt U.S. aid if they do, end quote.
The Castro regime severely attacked President Kennedy in connection with the Bay of Pigs affair, the Cuban missile crisis, the ban on travel to Cuba,
the economic embargo against that country, and the general policy of the United States with regard to Cuba.
An examination of the Militant, to which Oswald subscribed,
for the 3-month period prior to the assassination reflects an extremely critical attitude toward President Kennedy and his administration
concerning Cuban policy in general as well as on the issues of automation and civil rights, issues which appeared to concern Oswald a great deal.
The Militant also reflected a critical attitude toward President Kennedy's attempts to reduce tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It also dealt with the fear of the Castro regime that such a policy might result in its abandonment by the Soviet Union.
The October 7, 1963, issue of the Militant
reported Castro as saying Cuba could not accept a situation where at the same time the United States was trying to ease world tensions
it also was increasing its efforts to tighten the noose around Cuba.
was also reported in the October 1, 1963, issue of the Worker, to which Oswald also subscribed.
In this connection it should be noted that in speaking of the Worker, Oswald told Michael Paine, apparently in all seriousness, that, quote,
you could tell what they wanted you to do by reading between the lines, reading the thing and doing a little reading between the lines, end quote.
The general conflict of views between the United States and Cuba was, of course, reflected in other media to such an extent
that there can be no doubt that Oswald was aware generally of the critical attitude that Castro expressed about President Kennedy.
Oswald was asked during the New Orleans radio debate in which he engaged on August 21, 1963,
whether or not he agreed with Castro that President Kennedy was a, quote, ruffian and a thief, end quote. He replied that he, quote,
would not agree with that particular wording, end quote.
It should also be noted, however, that one witness testified that shortly before the assassination
Oswald had expressed approval of President Kennedy's active role in the area of civil rights.
Although Oswald could possibly have been motivated in part by his sympathy for the Castro government,
it should be remembered that his wife testified that he was disappointed with his failure to get to Cuba
and had lost his desire to do so because of the bureaucracy and red tape which he had encountered.
His unhappy experience with the Cuban consul seems thus to have reduced his enthusiasm for the Castro regime and his desire to go to Cuba.
While some of Castro's more severe criticisms of President Kennedy might have led Oswald to believe that he would be well received in Cuba
after he had assassinated the American President, it does not appear that he had any plans to go there.
Oswald was carrying only $13.87 at the time of his arrest, although he had left, apparently by design,
$170 in a wallet in his wife's room in Irving.
If there was no conspiracy which would help him escape, the possibility of which has been considered in chapter 6,
it is unlikely that a reasoning person would plan to attempt to travel from Dallas, Texas to Cuba
with $13.87 when considerably greater resources were available to him.
The fact that Oswald left behind the funds which might have enabled him to reach Cuba suggests the absence of any plan to try to flee there
and raises serious questions as to whether or not he ever expected to escape.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 6.
Possible Influence of Anti-Kennedy Sentiment in Dallas
It has been suggested that one of the motivating influences operating on Lee Oswald was the atmosphere in the city of Dallas,
especially an atmosphere of extreme opposition to President Kennedy that was present in some parts of the Dallas community
and which received publicity there prior to the assassination.
Some of that feeling was expressed in the incident involving then vice-presidential candidate Johnson during the 1960 campaign,
in the treatment of Ambassador Adlai Stevenson late in October of 1963
and in the extreme anti-Kennedy newspaper advertisement and handbills that appeared in Dallas at the time of the President's visit there.
The Commission has found no evidence that the extreme views expressed toward President Kennedy
by some rightwing groups centered in Dallas or any other general atmosphere of hate
or rightwing extremism which may have existed in the city of Dallas had any connection with Oswald's actions on November 22, 1963.
There is, of course, no way to judge what the effect of the general political ferment present in that city might have been, even though Oswald was aware of it.
His awareness is shown by a letter that he wrote to Arnold Johnson of the Communist Party U.S.A.,
which Johnson said he did not receive until after the assassination. The letter said in part, quote,
On October 23rd, I had attended a ultra-right meeting headed by General Edwin A. Walker, who lives in Dallas.
This meeting preceded by one day the attack on A. E. Stevenson at the United Nations Day meeting at which he spoke
As you can see, political friction between "left" and "right" is very great here.
Could you advise me as to the general view we have on the American Civil Liberties Union? End quote.
In any event, the Commission has been unable to find any credible evidence that Oswald had direct contact or association with
any of the personalities or groups epitomizing or representing the so-called right wing,
even though he did, as he told Johnson, attend a meeting at which General Walker spoke to approximately 1,300 persons.
Oswald's writings and his reading habits indicate that he had an extreme dislike of the right wing, an attitude most clearly reflected by his attempt
to shoot General Walker.
Relationship With Wife
The relations between Lee and Marina Oswald are of great importance in any attempt to understand Oswald's possible motivation.
During the period from Oswald's return from Mexico to the assassination,
he and his wife spent every weekend but one together at the Irving, Texas home of Mrs. Ruth Paine, who was then separated from her husband.
The sole exception was the weekend of November 16 to 17, 1963, the weekend before the assassination,
when his wife asked Oswald not to come to Irving.
During the week, Oswald lived in a roominghouse in Dallas, but he usually called his wife on the telephone twice a day.
She testified that after his return from Mexico Oswald, quote, changed for the better.
He began to treat me better. He helped me more -- although he always did help. But he was more attentive, end quote.
Marina Oswald attributed that to their living apart and to the imminent birth of their second child.
She testified that Oswald, quote, was very happy, end quote, about the birth of the child.
While those considerations no doubt had an effect on Oswald's attitude toward his family it would seem that the need for support and sympathy
after his recent rebuffs in Mexico City
might also have been important to him. It would not have been the first time that Oswald sought closer ties with his family in time of adversity.
His past relationships with his wife had been stormy, however, and it did not seem that she respected him very much.
They had been married after a courtship of only about 6 weeks, a part of which Oswald spent in the hospital.
Oswald's diary reports that he married his wife shortly after his proposal of marriage to another girl had been rejected.
He stated that the other girl rejected him partly because he was an American, a fact that he said she had exploited. He stated that, quote,
In spite of fact I married Marina to hurt Ella (the girl that had rejected him) I found myself in love with Marina, end quote.
Many of the people with whom the Oswalds became acquainted after their arrival in the United States thought that Marina Oswald had married her husband primarily in the hope
that she would be able to leave the Soviet Union. Marina Oswald has denied this.
Marina Oswald expressed one aspect of her husband's attitude toward her when she testified that, quote, Lee wanted me to go to Russia.
and I told him that
if he wanted me to go then that meant that he didn't love me, and that in that case what was the idea of coming to the United States in the first place.
Lee would say that it would be better for me if I went to Russia. I did not know why. I did not know what he had in mind.
He said he loved me but that it would be better for me if I went to Russia, and what he had in mind I don't know. End quote.
On the other hand, Oswald objected to the invitation that his wife had received to live with Mrs. Ruth Paine,
which Mrs. Paine had made in part to give her an alternative to returning to the Soviet Union. Marina Oswald wrote to Mrs. Paine that, quote,
Many times Oswald has recalled this matter to me and said that I am just waiting for an opportunity to hurt him.
It has been the cause of many of our arguments. End quote. Oswald claimed that his wife preferred others to him.
He said this about members of the Russian-speaking group in the Dallas-Ft. Worth area, whom she said he tried to forbid her from seeing,
and also about Mrs. Paine.
He specifically made that claim when his wife refused to come to live with him in Dallas as he asked her to do on the evening of November 21,
1963
The instability of their relations was probably a function of the personalities of both people. Oswald was overbearing in relations with his wife.
He apparently attempted to be "the Commander" by dictating many of the details of their married life.
While Marina Oswald said that her husband wanted her to learn English,
he made no attempt to help her and there are other indications that he did not want her to learn that language.
Oswald apparently wished to continue practicing his own Russian with her. Lieutenant Martello of the New Orleans police testified
that Oswald stated that he did not speak English in his family because he did not want them to become Americanized.
Marina Oswald's inability to speak English also made it more difficult for her to have an independent existence in this country.
Oswald struck his wife on occasion,
did not want her to drink, smoke or wear cosmetics and generally treated her with lack of respect in the presence of others.
The difficulties which Oswald's problems would have caused him in any relationship were probably not reduced by his wife's conduct.
Katherine Ford, with whom Marina Oswald stayed during her separation from her husband in November of 1962,
thought that Marina Oswald was immature in her thinking and partly responsible for the difficulties that the Oswalds were having at that time.
Mrs. Ford said that Marina Oswald admitted that she provoked Oswald on occasion.
There can be little doubt that some provocation existed.
Oswald once struck his wife because of a letter which she wrote to a former boyfriend in Russia.
In the letter Marina Oswald stated that her husband had changed a great deal and that she was very lonely in the United States.
She was, quote, sorry that I had not married him (the Russian boyfriend) instead, that it would have been much easier for me, end quote.
The letter fell into Oswald's hands when it was returned to his post office box
because of insufficient postage, which apparently resulted from an increase in postal rates of which his wife had been unaware.
Oswald read the letter, but refused to believe that it was sincere, even though his wife insisted to him that it was.
As a result Oswald struck her, as to which she testified, quote,
Generally, I think that was right, for such things that is the right thing to do. There was some grounds for it. End quote.
Although she denied it in some of her testimony before the Commission,
it appears that Marina Oswald also complained that her husband was not able to provide more material things for her.
On that issue George De Mohrenschildt, who was probably as close to the Oswalds as anyone else during their first stay in Dallas,
said that, quote, She was annoying him all the time
Why don't you make some money? Poor guy was going out of his mind. We told her she should not annoy him -- poor guy, he is doing his best, "Don't annoy him so much."
The De Mohrenschildts also testified that, quote, right in front, end quote, of Oswald Marina Oswald complained about Oswald's inadequacy as a husband.
Mrs. Oswald told another of her friends that Oswald was very cold to her, that they very seldom had sexual relations
and that Oswald, quote, was not a man, end quote. She also told Mrs. Paine that she was not satisfied with her sexual relations with Oswald.
Marina Oswald also ridiculed her husband's political views, thereby tearing down his view of his own importance.
He was very much interested in autobiographical works of outstanding statesmen of the United States, to whom his wife thought he compared himself.
She said he was different from other people in, quote, At, least his imagination, his fantasy, which was quite unfounded,
as to the fact that he was an outstanding man, end quote.
She said that she, quote, always tried to point out to him that he was a man like any others who were around us. But he simply could not understand that? End quote.
Jeanne De Mohrenschildt, however, thought that Marina Oswald, quote, said things that will hurt men's pride, end quote.
She said that if she ever spoke to her husband the way Marina Oswald spoke to her husband, quote, we would not last long, end quote.
Mrs. De Mohrenschildt thought that Oswald,
whom she compared to, quote, a puppy dog that everybody kicked, end quote, had a lot of good qualities, in spite of the fact that, quote,
Nobody said anything good about him. End quote.
She had, quote, the impression that he was just pushed, pushed, pushed, and she Marina Oswald was probably nagging, nagging, nagging, end quote.
She thought that he might not have become involved in the assassination if people had been kinder to him.
In spite of these difficulties, however, and in the face of the economic problems that were always with them,
things apparently went quite smoothly from the time Oswald returned from Mexico until the weekend of November 16 to 17, 1963.
Mrs. Paine was planning a birthday party for one of her children on that weekend and her husband, Michael, was to be at the house.
Marina Oswald said that she knew her husband did not like Michael Paine and so she asked him not to come out that weekend, even though he wanted to do so.
She testified that she told him, quote,
that he shouldn't come every week, that perhaps it is not convenient for Ruth that the whole family be there, live there, end quote.
She testified that he responded, quote, As you wish. If you don't want me to come, I won't, end quote.
Ruth Paine testified that she heard Marina Oswald tell Oswald about the birthday party.
On Sunday, November 17, 1963,
Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald decided to call Oswald at the place where he was living, unbeknownst to them, under the name of O. H. Lee.
They asked for Lee Oswald who was not called to the telephone because he was known by the other name.
When Oswald called the next day his wife became very angry about his use of the alias. He said that he used it because, quote,
he did not want his landlady to know his real name because she might read in the paper of the fact that he had been in Russia and that he had been questioned, end quote.
Oswald also said that he did not want the FBI to know where he lived, quote, Because their visits were not very pleasant for him
and he thought that he loses jobs because the FBI visits the place of his employment, end quote.
While the facts of his defection had become known in New Orleans as a result of his radio debate with Bringuier,
it would appear to be unlikely that his landlady in Dallas
would see anything in the newspaper about his defection, unless he engaged in activities similar to those
which had led to the disclosure of his defection in New Orleans.
Furthermore, even though it appears that at times Oswald was really upset by visits of the FBI,
it does not appear that he ever lost his job because of its activities, although he may well not have been aware of that fact.
While Oswald's concern about the FBI had some basis in fact, in that FBI agents had interviewed him in the past and had renewed their interest
to some extent after his Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities had become known, he exaggerated their concern for him.
Marina Oswald thought he did so in order to emphasize his importance.
For example, in his letter of November 9, 1963,
to the Soviet Embassy in Washington, he asked about the entrance visas for which he and his wife had previously applied.
He absolved the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City of any blame for his difficulties there. He advised the Washington Embassy
that the FBI was, quote, not now, end quote, interested in his Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities, but noted that the FBI, quote,
has visited us here in Dallas, Texas, on November 1. Agent James P. Hasty
warned me that if I engaged in F.P.C.C. activities in Texas the F.B.I. will again take an interest in me, end quote.
Neither Hosty nor any other agent of the FBI spoke to Oswald on any subject from August 10, 1963,
to the time of the assassination.
The claimed warning was one more of Oswald's fabrications.
Hosty had come to the Paine residence on November 1 and 5, 1963,
but did not issue any such warning or suggest that Marina Oswald defect from the Soviet Union and remain in the United States under FBI protection,
as Oswald went on to say. In Oswald's imagination, quote,
I and my wife strongly protested these tactics by the notorious F.B.I., end quote.
In fact, his wife testified that she only said that she would prefer not to receive any more visits from the Bureau
because of the, quote, very exciting and disturbing effect, end quote, they had upon her husband, who was not even present at that time.
The arguments he used to justify his use of the alias suggest that Oswald may have come to think that the whole world was becoming involved
in an increasingly complex conspiracy against him.
He may have felt he could never tell when the FBI was going to appear on the scene or who else was going to find out about his defection
and use it against him as had been done in New Orleans.
On the other hand, the concern he expressed about the FBI may have been just another story to support the objective he sought in his letter.
Those arguments, however, were not persuasive to Marina Oswald,
to whom, quote, it was nothing terrible if people were to find out that he had been in Russia, end quote.
She asked Oswald, quote,
After all, when will all your foolishness come to an end? All of these comedies. First one thing and then another. And now this fictitious name, end quote.
She said, quote,
On Monday, November 18, 1963, he called several times, but after I hung up on him and didn't want to talk to him he did not call again.
He then arrived on Thursday, November 21, 1963, end quote.
The events of that evening can best be appreciated through Marina Oswald's testimony
Question: Did your husband give any reason for coming home on Thursday?
Answer: He said that he was lonely because he hadn't come the preceding weekend, and he wanted to make his peace with me.
Question: Did you say anything to him then?
Answer: He tried to talk to me but I would not answer him, and he was very upset. Question: Were you upset with him?
Answer: I was angry, of course. He was not angry -- he was upset. I was angry. He tried very hard to please me.
He spent quite a bit of time putting away diapers and played with the children on the street.
Question: How did you indicate to him that you were angry with him? Answer: By not talking to him.
Question: And how did he show that he was upset?
He was upset over the fact that I would not answer him.
He tried to start a conversation with me several times, but I would not answer. And he said that he didn't want me to be angry at him because this upsets him.
On that day, he suggested that we rent an apartment in Dallas.
He said that he was tired of living alone and perhaps the reason for my being so angry was the fact that we were not living together.
That if I want to he would rent an apartment in Dallas tomorrow -- that he didn't want me to remain with Ruth any longer, but wanted me to live with him in Dallas.
He repeated this not once but several times, but I refused. And he said that once again I was preferring my friends to him, and that I didn't need him.
Question: What did you say to that?
Answer: I said it would be better if I remained with Ruth until the holidays, he would come, and we would all meet together.
That this was better because while he was living alone and I stayed with Ruth, we were spending less money. And I told him to buy me a washing machine, because two children
it became too difficult to wash by hand.
What did he say to that?
Answer: He said he would buy me a washing machine.
Question: What did you say to that? Answer:
Thank you. That it would be better if he bought something for himself -- that I would manage. End quote. That night Oswald went to bed before his wife retired.
She did not speak to him when she joined him there, although she thought that he was still awake.
The next morning he left for work before anyone else arose.
For the first time
he left his wedding ring in a cup on the dresser in his room. He also left $170 in a wallet in one of the dresser drawers.
He took with him $13.87 and the long brown package that Frazier and Mrs. Randle saw him carry
and which he was to take to the School Book Depository. The Unanswered Questions.
No one will ever know what passed through Oswald's mind during the week before November 22, 1963.
Instead of returning to Irving on November 15 for his customary weekend visit, he remained in Dallas at his wife's suggestion because of the birthday party.
He had argued with her over the use of an alias and had not called her after that argument, although he usually telephoned once or twice a day.
Then on Thursday morning, November 21,
he asked Frazier for a ride to Irving that night, stating falsely that he wanted to pick up some curtain rods to put in an apartment.
He must have planned his attack at the very latest prior to Thursday morning when he spoke to Frazier.
There is, of course, no way to determine the degree to which he was committed to his plan at that time.
While there is no way to tell when he first began to think specifically of assassinating the President
it should be noted that mention of the Trade Mart as the expected site of the Presidential luncheon
appeared in The Dallas Times Herald on November 15, 1963.
The next day that paper announced the final approval of the Trade Mart as the luncheon site and stated that the motorcade, quote,
apparently will loop through the downtown area, probably on Main Street,
en route from Dallas Love Field, end quote, on its way to the Trade Mart on Stemmons Freeway.
Anyone who was familiar with that area of Dallas would have known that the motorcade would probably pass the Texas School Book Depository to get from Main Street
onto the Stemmons Freeway.
That fact was made precisely clear in subsequent news stories on November 19, 20, and 22.
On November 15, 1963, the same day that his wife told him not to come to Irving, Oswald could have assumed
that the Presidential motorcade would pass in front of his place of work.
Whether he thought about assassinating the President over the weekend can never be known, but it is reasonably certain
that over the weekend he did think about his wife's request that he not come to Irving, which was prompted by the birthday party being held at the Paine home.
Oswald had a highly exaggerated sense of his own importance, but he had failed at almost everything he had ever tried to do.
He had great difficulty in establishing meaningful relations with other people. Except for his family he was completely alone.
Even though he had searched -- in the Marine Corps, in his ideal of communism, in the Soviet Union and in his attempt to get to Cuba
he had never found anything to which he felt he could really belong.
After he returned from his trip to Mexico where his application to go to Cuba had been sharply rejected,
it must have appeared to him that he was unable to command even the attention of his family.
He could not keep them with him in Dallas, where at least he could see his children whom, several witnesses testified, he seemed to love.
His family lived with Mrs. Paine, ostensibly because Oswald could not afford to keep an apartment in Dallas,
but it was also, at least in part, because his wife did not want to live there with him.
Now it appeared that he was not welcome at the Paine home,
where he had spent every previous weekend since his return from Mexico and his wife was once again calling into question his judgment,
this time concerning his use of an alias.
The conversation on Monday, November 18, 1963,
ended when Marina Oswald hung up and refused to talk to him. Although he may long before have decided on the course he was to follow
and may have told his wife the things he did on the evening of November 21,
1963, merely to disarm her and to provide a justification of sorts,
both she and Mrs. Paine thought he had come home to make up after the fight on Monday.
Thoughts of his personal difficulties must have been at least partly on his mind when he went to Irving on Thursday night and told his wife that he was lonely,
that he wanted to make peace with her and bring his family to Dallas where they could live with him again.
The Commission does not believe that the relations between Oswald and his wife caused him to assassinate the President.
It is unlikely that the motivation was that simple.
The feelings of hostility and aggression which seem to have played such an important, part in Oswald's life
were part of his character long before he met his wife
and such a favorable opportunity to strike at a figure as great as the President would probably never have come to him again.
Oswald's behavior after the assassination throws little light on his motives.
The fact that he took so little money with him when he left Irving in the morning indicates that he did not expect to get very far from Dallas on his own
and suggests the possibility, as did his note to his wife just prior to the attempt on General Walker, that he did not expect to escape at all.
On the other hand, he could have traveled some distance with the money he did have and he did return to his room where he obtained his revolver.
He then killed Patrolman Tippit when that police officer apparently tried to question him after he had left his roominghouse and he vigorously resisted arrest
when he was finally apprehended in the Texas Theatre. Although it is not fully corroborated by others who were present,
two officers have testified that at the time of his arrest Oswald said something to the effect that, quote, it's all over now, end quote.
Oswald was overbearing and arrogant throughout much of the time between his arrest and his own death.
He consistently refused to admit involvement in the assassination or in the killing of Patrolman Tippit.
While he did become enraged at at least one point in his interrogation,
the testimony of the officers present indicates that he handled himself with considerable composure during his questioning.
He admitted nothing that would damage him but discussed other matters quite freely.
His denials under questioning, which have no probative value in view of the many readily demonstrable lies he told at that time
and in the face of the overwhelming evidence against him
which has been set forth above, only served to prolong the period during which he was the center of the attention of the entire world.
Many factors were undoubtedly involved in Oswald's motivation for the assassination, and the Commission does not believe
that it can ascribe to him any one motive or group of motives.
It is apparent, however, that Oswald was moved by an overriding hostility to his environment.
He does not appear to have been able to establish meaningful relationships with other people. He was perpetually discontented with the world around him.
Long before the assassination he expressed his hatred for American society and acted in protest against it.
Oswald's search for what he conceived to be the perfect society was doomed from the start.
He sought for himself a place in history -- a role as the "great man" who would be recognized as having been in advance of his times.
His commitment to Marxism and communism appears to have been another important factor in his motivation.
He also had demonstrated a capacity to act decisively and without regard to the consequences when such action would further his aims of the moment.
Out of these and the many other factors which may have molded the character of Lee Harvey Oswald
there emerged a man capable of assassinating President Kennedy.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By
The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 1.
In the 100 years since 1865
four Presidents of the United States have been assassinated
Abraham Lincoln, James A. Garfield, William McKinley, and John F. Kennedy.
During this same period there were three other attacks on the life of a President,
a President-elect, and a candidate for the Presidency, which narrowly failed:
on Theodore Roosevelt while campaigning in October of 1912; on President-elect Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
when visiting Miami on February 15, 1933; and on President Harry S. Truman on November 1, 1950,
when his temporary residence, Blair House, was attacked by Puerto Rican Nationalists.
One out of every five Presidents since 1865 has been assassinated;
there have been attempts on the lives of one out of every three.
Prompted by these dismaying statistics, the Commission has inquired into the problems and methods of Presidential protection in effect
at the time of President Kennedy's assassination.
This study has led the Commission to conclude that the public interest might be served by any contribution it can make to the improvement of protective arrangements.
The Commission has not undertaken a comprehensive examination of all facets of this subject;
rather, it has devoted its time and resources to those broader aspects of Presidential protection
to which the events of last November called attention.
In this part of its inquiry the Commission has had full access to a major study of all phases of protective activities
prepared by the Secret Service for the Secretary of the Treasury following the assassination. As a result of this study,
the Secretary of the Treasury has prepared a planning document dated August 27, 1964,
which recommends additional personnel and facilities to enable the Secret Service to expand its protection capabilities.
The Secretary of the Treasury submitted this planning document on August 31, 1964,
to the Bureau of the Budget for review and approval.
This planning document has been made a part of the Commission's published record; the underlying staff and consultants' reports reviewed by the Commission have not,
since a disclosure of such detailed information relating to protective measures might undermine present methods of protecting the President.
However, all information considered by the Commission which pertains to the protective function as it was carried out in Dallas has been published as part of this report.
The protection of the President of the United States is an immensely difficult and complex task.
It is unlikely that measures can be devised to eliminate entirely the multitude of diverse dangers that may arise,
particularly when the President is traveling in this country or abroad.
The protective task is further complicated by the reluctance of Presidents to take security precautions which might interfere with the performance of their duties,
or their desire to have frequent and easy access to the people.
The adequacy of existing procedures can fairly be assessed only after full consideration of the difficulty of the protective assignment,
with particular attention to the diverse roles which the President is expected to fill.
After reviewing this aspect of the matter this chapter will set forth the Commission's conclusions
regarding certain protective measures in force at the time of the Dallas trip and propose recommendations for improvements.
The nature of the protective assignment.
The President is Head of State, Chief Executive, Commander in Chief, and leader of a political party.
As the ceremonial head of the Government the President must discharge a wide range of public duties, not only in Washington but throughout the land.
In this role he appears to the American people, in the words of William Howard Taft, as, quote,
the personal embodiment and representative of their dignity and majesty, end quote.
As Chief Executive, the President controls the exercise of the vast, almost incalculable powers of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
As Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, he must maintain ultimate authority over the development and disposition of our military power.
in accordance with George Washington's maxim that Americans have a government, quote, of accommodation as well as a government of laws, end quote,
it is the President's right and duty to be the active leader of his party, as when he seeks to be reelected or to maintain his party in power.
In all of these roles the President must go to the people.
Exposure of the President to public view through travel among the people of this country is a great and historic tradition of American life.
Desired by both the President and the public, it is an indispensable means of communication between the two.
More often than not, Presidential journeys have served more than one purpose at the same time: ceremonial,
administrative, political.
From George Washington to John F. Kennedy, such journeys have been a normal part of the President's activities.
To promote nationwide acceptance of his administration Washington made grand tours that served also to excite interest in the Presidency.
In recent years, Presidential journeys have been frequent and extensive,
partly because of the greater speed and comfort of travel and partly because of the greater demands made on the President.
It is now possible for Presidents to travel the length and breadth of a land far larger than the United States
in 1789 in less time than it took George Washington to travel from New York to Mount Vernon
or Thomas Jefferson from Washington to Monticello.
During his Presidency, Franklin D. Roosevelt made almost 400 journeys and traveled more than 350,000 miles.
Since 1945, Roosevelt's successors have ranged the world,
and their foreign journeys have come to be accepted as normal rather than extraordinary.
John F. Kennedy's journey to Texas in November 1963 was in this tradition.
His friend and Special Assistant Kenneth O'Donnell, who accompanied him on his last visit to Dallas,
stated the President's views of his responsibilities with simplicity and clarity, quote,
The President's views of his responsibilities as President of the United States were that he meet the people, that he go out to their homes and see them,
and allow them to see him, and discuss, if possible, the views of the world as he sees it, the problems of the country as he sees them.
And he felt that leaving Washington for the President of the United States was a most necessary -- not only for the people, but for the President himself,
that he expose himself to the actual basic problems that were disturbing the American people.
It helped him in his job here, he was able to come back here with a fresh view of many things.
I think he felt very strongly that the President ought to get out of Washington, and go meet the people on a regular basis. End quote.
Whatever their purposes Presidential journeys have greatly enlarged and complicated the task of protecting the President.
The Secret Service and the Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies which cooperate with it,
have been confronted in recent years with increasingly difficult problems, created by the greater exposure of the President during his travels
and the greater diversity of the audiences he must face in a world torn by conflicting ideologies.
If the sole goal were to protect the life of the President, it could be accomplished with reasonable assurance despite the multiple roles he must play.
But his very position as representative of the people prevents him from effectively shielding himself from the people.
He cannot and will not take the precautions of a dictator or a sovereign.
Under our system, measures must be sought to afford security without impeding the President's performance of his many functions.
The protection of the President must be thorough but inconspicuous to avoid even the suggestion of a garrison state.
The rights of private individuals must not be infringed.
If the protective job is well done, its performance will be evident only in the unexceptional fact of its success.
The men in charge of protecting the President, confronted by complex problems and limited as they are in the measures they may employ,
must depend upon the utmost cooperation and understanding from the public and the President.
The problem and the reasonable approach to its solution were ably stated in a memorandum prepared by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover
for the President soon after the assassination, quote,
The degree of security that can be afforded the President of the United States
is dependent to a considerable extent upon the degree of contact with the general public desired by the President.
Absolute security is neither practical nor possible. An approach to complete security would require the President
to operate in a sort of vacuum, isolated from the general public and behind impregnable barriers.
His travel would be in secret; his public appearances would be behind bulletproof glass. A more practical approach necessitates compromise.
Any travel, any contact with the general public, involves a calculated risk on the part of the President and the men responsible for his protection.
Such risks can be lessened when the President recognizes the security problem,
has confidence in the dedicated Secret Service men who are ready to lay down their lives for him
and accepts the necessary security precautions which they recommend.
Many Presidents have been understandably impatient with the security precautions which many years of experience dictate
because these precautions reduce the President's privacy and the access to him of the people of the country.
Nevertheless the procedures and advice should be accepted if the President wishes to have any security.
Evaluation Of Presidential Protection At The Time Of The Assassination Of President Kennedy
The history of Presidential protection shows growing recognition over the years that the job must be done by able, dedicated,
thoroughly professional personnel, using the best technical equipment that can be devised.
The assassination of President Kennedy demands an examination of the protective measures employed to safe guard him
and an inquiry whether improvements can be made which will reduce the risk of another such tragedy.
This section considers first the means used to locate potential sources of danger to the President in time to take appropriate precautions.
In this connection the information available to Federal agencies about Lee Harvey Oswald
is set out and the reasons why this information was not furnished to the Secret Service appraised.
Second, the adequacy of other advance preparations for the security of the President, during his visit to Dallas,
largely measures taken by the Secret Service, is considered.
Finally, the performance of those charged with the immediate responsibility of protecting the President on November 22 is reviewed.
Intelligence Functions Relating to Presidential Protection at the Time of the Dallas Trip
A basic element of Presidential protection
is the identification and elimination of possible sources of danger to the President before the danger becomes actual.
The Secret Service has attempted to perform this function through the activities of its Protective Research Section
and requests to other agencies, Federal and local, for useful information.
The Commission has concluded that at the time of the assassination
the arrangements relied upon by the Secret Service to perform this function were seriously deficient.
Adequacy of preventive intelligence operations of the Secret Service.
The main job of the Protective Research Section (PRS)
is to collect, process, and evaluate information about persons or groups who may be a danger to the President.
In addition to this function, PRS is responsible for such tasks
as obtaining clearance of some categories of White House employees and all tradesmen who service the White House,
the security processing of gifts sent to the President, and technical inspections against covert listening devices.
At the time of the assassination PRS was a very small group, comprised of 12 specialists and 3 clerks.
Many persons call themselves to the attention of PRS by attempting to visit, the President
for bizarre reasons or by writing or in some other way attempting to communicate with him in a threatening or abusive manner
or with undue persistence.
Robert I. Bouck, special agent in charge of PRS,
estimated that most of the material received by his office originated in this fashion
or from the occasional investigations initiated by the Secret Service,
while the balance was furnished to PRS by other Federal agencies, with primary source being the FBI.
The total volume of information received by PRS has risen steadily.
In 1943 PRS received approximately 9,000 items of information;
in 1953 this had increased to more than 17,000 items;
in 1963 the total exceeded 32,000 items.
Since many items may pertain to a single case, these figures do not show the caseload.
In the period from November 1961 to November 1963,
PRS received items in 8,709 cases.
Before the assassination of President Kennedy,
PRS expressed its interest in receiving information on suspects in very general terms. For example,
PRS instructed the White House mailroom, a source of much PRS data,
to refer all communications on identified existing cases and, in addition,
any communication, quote, that in any way indicates anyone may have possible intention of harming the President, end quote.
Slightly more specific criteria were established for PRS personnel processing White House mail referred by the White House mailroom,
but again the standards were very general.
These instructions to PRS personnel appear to be the only instance where an effort was made to reduce the criteria to writing.
When requested to provide a specific statement of the standards employed by PRS in deciding what information to seek and retain,
The Secret Service responded, quote,
The criteria in effect prior to November 22, 1963, for determining whether to accept material for the PRS general files
were broad and flexible. All material is and was desired, accepted, and filed if it indicated or tended to indicate
that the safety of the President is or might be in danger, either at the present or in the future.
There are many actions, situations, and incidents that may indicate such potential danger. Some are specific, such as threats;
danger may be implied from others, such as membership or activity in an organization which believes in assassination as a political weapon.
All material received by PRS was separately screened
and a determination made as to whether the information might indicate possible harm to the President.
If the material was evaluated
as indicating some potential danger to the President -- no matter how small -- it was indexed in the general PRS files
under the name of the individual or group of individuals to whom that material related. End quote.
The general files of PRS consist of folders on individuals, card indexed by name.
The files are manually maintained, without use of any automatic data-processing techniques.
At the time of the assassination, the active PRS general files contained approximately 50,000 cases
accumulated over a 20-year period, some of which included more than one individual.
A case file was established if the information available suggested that the subject might be a danger to the President.
Many of these cases were not investigated by PRS.
The case file served merely as a repository for information until enough had accumulated to warrant an investigation.
During the period November 1961 to November 1963,
PRS investigated 34 newly established or reactivated cases concerning residents of Texas.
Most of these cases involved persons who used threatening language in communications to or about the President.
An additional 115 cases concerning Texas residents were established but not investigated.
When PRS learns of an individual whose conduct warrants scrutiny, it requests an investigation by the closest Secret Service field office,
of which there are 65 throughout the country.
If the field office determines that the case should be subject to continuing review, PRS establishes a file
which requires a checkup at least, every 6 months.
This might involve a personal interview or interviews with members of the person's household. Wherever possible,
the Secret Service arranges for the family and friends of the individual, and local law enforcement officials,
to advise the field office if the subject displays signs of increased danger or plans to leave his home area.
At the time of the assassination there were approximately 400 persons throughout the country who were subject to periodic review.
If PRS concludes after investigation
that an individual presents a significant danger to the life of the President, his name is placed in a "trip index file"
which is maintained on a geographical field office basis.
At the time of the assassination the names of about 100 persons were in this index, all of whom were included in the group of 400
being reviewed regularly.
PRS also maintains an album of photographs and descriptions of about 12 to 15 individuals who are regarded as clear risks to the President
and who do not have a fixed place of residence. Members of the White House detail of the Secret Service have copies of this album.
Individuals who are regarded as dangerous to the President
and who are in penal or hospital custody are listed only in the general files of PRS,
but there is a system for the immediate notification of the Secret Service by the confining institution when a subject is released or escapes.
PRS attempts to eliminate serious risks by hospitalization or, where necessary,
the prosecution of persons who have committed an offense such as threatening the President.
In June 1964 PRS had arrangements to be notified about the release or escape of approximately 1,000 persons.
In summary, at the time of the assassination
PRS had received, over a 20-year period, basic information on some 50,000 cases;
it had arrangements to be notified about release from confinement in roughly 1,000 cases;
it had established periodic regular review of the status of 400 individuals;
it regarded approximately 100 of these 400 cases as serious risks
and 12 to 15 of these cases as highly dangerous risks.
Members of the White House detail were expected to familiarize themselves with the descriptions and photographs of the highest risk cases.
The cases subject to periodic review and the 100 or so cases in the higher risk category
were filed on a geographic basis, and could conveniently be reviewed by a Secret Service agent preparing for a Presidential trip
to a particular part of the country. These were the files reviewed by PRS on November 8, 1963,
at the request of Special Agent Lawson, advance agent for President Kennedy's trip to Dallas.
The general files of PRS were not indexed by geographic location and were of little use in preparing for a Presidential visit to a specific locality.
Secret Service requests to other agencies for intelligence information
were no more specific than the broad and general instructions its own agents and the White House mailroom.
The head of PRS testified that the Secret Service requested other agencies to provide, quote,
any and all information that they may come in contact with that would indicate danger to the President, end quote.
These requests were communicated in writing by the Secret Service; rather, the Service depended on the personal liaison maintained by PRS
with the headquarters of the Federal intelligence agencies, particularly the FBI,
and at the working level with personnel of the field offices of the various agencies. The Service frequently participated
in the training programs of other law enforcement agencies, and agents from other agencies attended the regular Secret Service training schools.
Presidential protection was an important topic in these training programs.
In the absence of more specific instructions, other Federal agencies interpreted the Secret Service's informal requests
to relate principally to overt threats to harm the President or other specific manifestations of hostility.
For example, at the time of the assassination, the FBI Handbook, which is in the possession of every Bureau special agent, provided, quote,
Threats against the President of the U.S.,
members of his immediate family, the President-elect, and the Vice-President. Investigation of threats against the President of the United States,
members of his immediate family, the President-Elect, and the Vice-President is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the U.S. Secret Service.
Any information indicating the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President,
members of the immediate family of the President, the President-Elect or the Vice-President
must be referred immediately by the most expeditious means of communication to the nearest office of the U.S. Secret Service.
Advise the Bureau at the same time by teletype of the information so furnished to the Secret Service and the fact that it has been so disseminated.
The above action should be taken without delay in order to attempt to verify the information and no evaluation of the information should be attempted.
When the threat is in the form of a written communication, give a copy to local Secret Service and forward the original to the Bureau
where it will be made available to Secret Service headquarters in Washington.
The referral of the copy to local Secret Service should not delay the immediate referral of the information by the fastest available means of communication
to Secret Service locally, end quote.
The State Department advised the Secret Service of all crank and threat letter mail
or crank visitors and furnished reports concerning any assassination or attempted assassination of a ruler or other major official anywhere in the world.
The several military intelligence agencies reported crank mail and similar threats involving the President.
According to Special Agent in Charge Bouck,
the Secret Service had no standard procedure for the systematic review of its requests for and receipt of information from other Federal agencies.
The Commission believes that the facilities and procedures of the Protective Research Section of the Secret Service
prior to November 22, 1963, were inadequate.
Its efforts appear to have been too largely directed at the "crank" threat.
Although the Service recognized that its advance preventive measures must encompass more than these most obvious dangers,
it made little effort to identify factors in the activities of an individual
or an organized group, other than specific threats, which suggested a source of danger against which timely precautions could be taken.
Except for its special "trip index" file of 400 names,
none of the cases in the PRS general files was available for systematic review on a geographic basis when the President planned a particular trip.
As reported in chapter 2, when the special file was reviewed on November 8,
it contained the names of no persons from the entire Dallas-Fort Worth area,
notwithstanding the fact that Ambassador Stevenson had been abused by pickets in Dallas less than a month before.
Bouck explained the failure to try to identify the individuals involved in the Stevenson incident after it occurred on the ground that
PRS required a more direct indication of a threat to the President, and that there was no such indication until the President's scheduled visit to that area became known.
Such an approach seriously undermines the precautionary nature of PRS work;
if the presence in Dallas of the Stevenson pickets might have created a danger for the President on a visit to that city,
PRS should have investigated and been prepared to guard against it.
Other agencies occasionally provided information to the Secret Service concerning potentially dangerous political groups.
This was done in the case of the Nationalist Party of Puerto Rico, for example, but only after members of the group had resorted to political violence.
However, the vague requests for information which the Secret Service made
to Federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies were not well designed to elicit information from them
about persons other than those who were obvious threats to the President.
The requests shifted the responsibility for evaluating difficult cases from the Service, the agency most responsible for performing that task,
to the other agencies. No specific guidance was provided.
Although the CIA had on file requests from the Treasury Department for information on the counterfeiting of U.S. currency and certain smuggling matters,
it had no written specification of intelligence information collected by CIA abroad which was desired by the Secret Service
in advance of Presidential trips outside the United States.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 2.
Information known about Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination.
No information concerning Lee Harvey Oswald appeared in PRS files before the President's trip to Dallas.
Oswald was known to other Federal agencies with which the Secret Service maintained intelligence liaison.
The FBI had been interested in him, to some degree at least, since the time of his defection in October 1959.
It had interviewed him twice shortly after his return to the United States, again a year later at his request
and was investigating him at the time of the assassination. The Commission has taken the testimony of Bureau agents
who interviewed Oswald after his return from the Soviet Union and prior to November 22, 1963,
the agent who was assigned his case at the time of the assassination, the Director of the FBI,
and the Assistant to the Director in charge of all investigative activities under the Director and Associate Director. In addition,
the Director and Deputy Director for Plans of the CIA testified concerning that Agency's limited knowledge of Oswald before the assassination.
Finally, the Commission has reviewed the complete files on Oswald, as they existed at the time of the assassination, of the Department of State,
the Office of Naval Intelligence, the FBI and the CIA. The information known to the FBI is summarized below.
From defection to return to Fort Worth.
The FBI opened a file on Oswald in October 1959, when news reports appeared of his defection to the Soviet Union.
The file was opened, quote,
for the purpose of correlating information inasmuch as he was considered a possible security risk in the event he returned to this country, end quote.
Oswald's defection was also the occasion for the opening of files by the Department of State, CIA, and the Office of Naval Intelligence.
Until April 1960, FBI activity consisted of placing in Oswald's file
information regarding his relations with the U.S. Embassy in Moscow and background data relating largely to his prior military service,
provided by other agencies.
In April 1960, Mrs. Marguerite Oswald and Robert Oswald were interviewed
in the course of a routine FBI investigation of transfers of small sums of money from Mrs. Oswald to her son in Russia.
During the next 2 years the FBI continued to accumulate information,
and kept itself informed on Oswald's status by periodic reviews of State Department and Office of Naval Intelligence files.
In this way, it learned that when Oswald had arrived in the Soviet Union
he had attempted to renounce his U.S. citizenship and applied for Soviet citizenship,
had described himself as a Marxist, had said he would give the Soviet Union any useful information he had acquired
as a marine radar technician and had displayed an arrogant and aggressive attitude at the U.S. Embassy;
it learned also that Oswald had been discharged from the Marine Corps Reserve as undesirable in August 1960.
In June 1962, the Bureau was advised by the Department of State of Oswald's plan to return to the United States.
The Bureau made arrangements to be advised by immigration authorities of his return,
and instructed the Dallas office to interview him when he got back to determine whether he had been recruited by a Soviet intelligence service.
Oswald's file at the Department of State Passport Office was reviewed in June 1962.
It revealed his letter of January 30, 1962, to Secretary of the Navy Connally,
in which he protested his discharge and declared that he would use, quote, all means, end quote, to correct it.
The file reflected the Department's determination that Oswald had not expatriated himself.
From return to Fort Worth to move to New Orleans.
Oswald was first interviewed by FBI Agents John W. Fain and B. Tom Carter on June 26, 1962,
Agent Fain reported to headquarters that Oswald was impatient and arrogant,
and unwilling to answer questions regarding his motive for going to the Soviet Union.
Oswald, quote, denied that he had ever denounced his U.S. citizenship, and that he had ever applied for Soviet citizenship specifically, end quote.
Oswald was, however, willing to discuss his contacts with Soviet authorities. He denied having any involvement with Soviet intelligence agencies
and promised to advise the FBI if he heard from them.
Agent Fain was not satisfied by this interview and arranged to see Oswald again on August 16, 1962.
According to Fain's contemporaneous memorandum and his present recollection,
while Oswald remained somewhat evasive at this interview, he was not antagonistic and seemed generally to be settling down.
Marina Oswald, however, recalled that her husband was upset by this interview.
Oswald again agreed to advise the FBI if he were approached under suspicious circumstances; however, he deprecated the possibility of this happening,
particularly since his employment did not involve any sensitive information.
Having concluded that Oswald was not a security risk or potentially dangerous or violent,
Fain determined that nothing further remained to be done at that time and recommended that the case be placed in a closed status.
This is an administrative classification indicating that no further work has been scheduled.
It does not preclude the agent in charge of the case from reopening it if he feels that further work should be done.
From August 1962
until March 1963, the FBI continued to accumulate information regarding Oswald but engaged in no active investigation.
Agent Fain retired from the FBI in October 1962, and the closed Oswald case was not reassigned.
However, pursuant to a regular Bureau practice of interviewing certain immigrants from Iron Curtain countries,
Fain had been assigned to see Marina Oswald at an appropriate time.
This assignment was given to Agent James P. Hosty, Jr. of the Dallas office upon Fain's retirement.
In March 1963, while attempting to locate Marina Oswald,
Agent Hosty was told by Mrs. M. F. Tobias, a former landlady of the Oswalds at 602 Elsbeth Street in Dallas,
that other tenants had complained because Oswald was drinking to excess and beating his wife.
This information led Hosty to review Oswald's file, from which he learned that Oswald had become a subscriber to the Worker,
a Communist Party publication.
Hosty decided that the Lee Harvey Oswald case should be reopened because of the alleged personal difficulties and the contact with the Worker,
and his recommendation was accepted. He decided, however, not to interview Marina Oswald at that time, and merely determined
that the Oswalds were living at 214 Neely Street in Dallas.
On April 21, 1963, the FBI field office in New York
was advised that Oswald was in contact with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New York, and that he had written to the committee
stating that he had distributed its pamphlets on the streets of Dallas. This information did not reach Agent Hosty in Dallas until June.
Hosty considered the information to be, quote, stale, unquote, by that time, and did not attempt to verify Oswald's reported statement.
Under a general Bureau request to be on the alert for activities of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee
Hosty had inquired earlier and found no evidence that it was functioning in the Dallas area.
In New Orleans. In the middle of May of 1963, Agent Hosty checked Oswald's last known residence and found that he had moved.
Oswald was tentatively located in New Orleans in June,
and Hosty asked the New Orleans FBI office to determine Oswald's address and what he was doing.
The New Orleans office investigated and located Oswald, learning his address and former place of employment on August 5, 1963.
A confidential informant advised the FBI that Oswald was not known to be engaged in Communist Party activities in New Orleans.
On June 24, Oswald applied in New Orleans for a passport, stating that he planned to depart by ship
for an extended tour of Western European countries, the Soviet Union, Finland, and Poland.
The Passport Office of the Department of State in Washington had no listing for Oswald requiring special treatment,
and his application was approved on the following day.
The FBI had not asked to be informed of any effort by Oswald to obtain a passport,
as it might have under existing procedures, and did not know of his application.
According to the Bureau, quote,
We did not request the State Department to include Oswald on a list which would have resulted in advising us of any application for a passport
inasmuch as the facts relating to Oswald's activities at that time did not warrant such action.
Our investigation of Oswald had disclosed no evidence that Oswald was acting under the instructions or on behalf of
any foreign government or instrumentality thereof. End quote.
On August 9, 1963,
Oswald was arrested and jailed by the New Orleans Police Department for disturbing the peace, in connection with a street fight which broke out when he was accosted
by anti-Castro Cubans while distributing leaflets on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
On the next day, he asked the New Orleans police to arrange for him to be interviewed by the FBI.
The police called the local FBI office and an agent, John L. Quigley, was sent to the police station.
Agent Quigley did not know of Oswald's prior FBI record when he interviewed him,
inasmuch as the police had not given Oswald's name to the Bureau when they called the office.
Quigley recalled that Oswald was receptive when questioned about his general background
but less than completely truthful or cooperative when interrogated about the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Quigley testified, quote,
When I began asking him specific details with respect to his activities in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans as to where meetings were held,
who was involved, what occurred, he was reticent to furnish information,
reluctant and actually as far as I was concerned, was completely evasive on them. End quote.
In Quigley's judgment,
Oswald, quote, was probably making a self-serving statement in attempting to explain to me why he was distributing this literature, and for no other reason,
and when I got to questioning him further then he felt that his purpose had been served and he wouldn't say anything further, end quote.
During the interview Quigley obtained background information from Oswald which was inconsistent with information already in the Bureau's possession.
When Quigley returned to his office, he learned
that another Bureau agent, Milton R. Knack, had been conducting a background investigation of Oswald at the request of Agent Hosty in Dallas.
Quigley advised Knack of his interview and gave him a detailed memorandum.
Knack was aware of the facts known to the FBI and recognized Oswald's false statements.
For example, Oswald claimed that his wife's maiden name was Prossa
and that they had been married in Fort Worth and lived there until coming to New Orleans. He had told the New Orleans arresting officers that he had been born in Cuba.
Several days later, the Bureau received additional evidence that Oswald had lied to Agent Quigley.
On August 22, it learned that Oswald had appeared on a radio discussion program on August 21.
William Stuckey, who had appeared on the radio program with Oswald, told the Bureau on August 30
that Oswald had told him that he had worked and been married in the Soviet Union.
Neither these discrepancies nor the fact that Oswald had initiated the FBI interview
was considered sufficiently unusual to necessitate another interview. Alan H. Belmont, Assistant to the Director of the FBI,
stated the Bureau's reasoning in this way, quote,
Our interest in this man at this point was to determine whether his activities constituted a threat to the internal security of the country.
It was apparent that he had made a self-serving statement to Agent Quigley. It became a matter of record in our files as a part of the case,
and if we determined that the course of the investigation required us to clarify or face him down with this information, we would do it at the appropriate time.
In other words, he committed no violation of the law by telling us something that wasn't true, and unless this required further investigation at that time,
we would handle it in due course, in accord with the whole context of the investigation. End quote.
On August 21, 1963, Bureau headquarters instructed the New Orleans and Dallas field offices
to conduct an additional investigation of Oswald in view of the activities which had led to his arrest.
FBI informants in the New Orleans area, familiar with pro-Castro or Communist Party activity there,
advised the Bureau that Oswald was unknown in such circles.
In early September 1963
the FBI transferred the principal responsibility for the Oswald case from the Dallas office to the New Orleans office.
Soon after, on October 1, 1963,
The FBI was advised by the rental agent for the Oswalds' apartment in New Orleans that they had moved again.
According to the information received by the Bureau
they had vacated their apartment, and Marina Oswald had departed with their child in a station wagon with Texas registration.
On October 3, Hosty reopened the case in Dallas to assist the New Orleans office.
He checked in Oswald's old neighborhood and throughout the Dallas-Fort Worth area but was unable to locate Oswald.
The next word about Oswald's location was a communication from the CIA to the FBI on October 10,
advising that an individual tentatively identified as Oswald had been in touch with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City
in early October of 1963.
The Bureau had no earlier information suggesting that Oswald had left the United States.
The possible contact with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico intensified the FBI's interest in learning Oswald's whereabouts.
The FBI representative in Mexico City arranged to follow up this information with the CIA and to verify Oswald's entry into Mexico.
The CIA message was sent also to the Department of State where it was reviewed by personnel of the Passport Office, who knew from Oswald's file
that he had sought and obtained a passport on June 25, 1963.
The Department of State did not advise either the CIA or the FBI of these facts.
On October 25,
the New Orleans office of the FBI learned that in September Oswald had given a forwarding address of 2515
West Fifth Street, Irving, Texas. After receiving this information on October 29, Agent Hosty attempted to locate Oswald.
On the same day Hosty interviewed neighbors on Fifth Street and learned that the address was that of Mrs. Ruth Paine.
He conducted a limited background investigation of the Paines, intending to interview Mrs. Paine and ask her particularly about Oswald's whereabouts.
Having determined that Mrs. Paine was a responsible and reliable citizen, Hosty interviewed her on November 1.
The interview lasted about 20 to 25 minutes. In response to Hosty's inquiries, Mrs. Paine, quote,
readily admitted that Mrs. Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald's two children were staying with her.
She said that Lee Oswald was living somewhere in Dallas. She didn't know where. She said it was in the Oak Cliff area but she didn't have his address.
I asked her if she knew where he worked.
After a moment's hesitation, she told me that he worked at the Texas School Book Depository near the downtown area of Dallas.
She didn't have the exact address, and it is my recollection that we went to the phone book and looked it up,
found it to be 411 Elm Street. End quote.
Mrs. Paine told Hosty also
that Oswald was living alone in Dallas because she did not want him staying at her house, although she was willing to let Oswald visit his wife and children.
According to Hosty, Mrs. Paine indicated that she thought she could find out where Oswald was living and would let him know.
At this point in the interview, Hosty gave Mrs. Paine his name and office telephone number on a piece of paper.
At the end of the interview, Marina Oswald came into the room. When he observed that she seemed, quote, quite alarmed, end quote, about the visit,
Hosty assured her, through Mrs. Paine as interpreter, that the FBI would not harm or harass her.
On November 4, Hosty telephoned the Texas School Book Depository and learned that Oswald was working there
and that he had given as his address Mrs. Paine's residence in Irving.
Hosty took the necessary steps to have the Dallas office of the FBI, rather than the New Orleans office, reestablished as the office with principal responsibility.
On November 5, Hosty was traveling near Mrs. Paine's home and took the occasion to stop by to ask whether she had any further information.
Mrs. Paine had nothing to add to what she had already told him, except that during a visit that past weekend,
Oswald had said that he was a, quote, Trotskyite Communist, end quote.
and that she found this and similar statements illogical and somewhat amusing. On this occasion Hosty was at the Paine residence for only a few minutes.
During neither interview did Hosty learn Oswald's address
or telephone number in Dallas. Mrs. Paine testified that she learned Oswald's telephone number at the Beckley Street roominghouse in the middle of October
shortly after Oswald rented the room on October 14.
As discussed in chapter 6, she failed to report this to Agent Hosty
because she thought the FBI was in possession of a great deal of information and certainly would find it very easy to learn where Oswald was living.
Hosty did nothing further in connection with the Oswald case until after the assassination. On November 1, 1963,
he had received a copy of the report of the New Orleans office which contained Agent Quigley's memorandum of the interview in the New Orleans jail on August 10,
and realized immediately that Oswald had given false biographic information. Hosty knew that he would eventually have to investigate this, and, quote,
was quite interested in determining the nature of his contact with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City, end quote.
When asked what his next step would have been, Hosty replied, quote,
Well, as I had previously stated, I have between 25 and 40 cases assigned to me at any one time. I had other matters to take care of.
I had now established that Lee Oswald was not employed in a sensitive industry.
I can now afford to wait until New Orleans forwarded the necessary papers to me to show me I now had all the information.
It was then my plan to interview Marina Oswald in detail concerning both herself and her husband's background. Question:
Had you planned any steps beyond that point?
Answer: No. I would have to wait until I had talked to Marina to see what I could determine, and from there I could make my plans.
Question: Did you take any action on this case between November 5 and November 22? Answer: No, sir.
The official Bureau files confirm Hosty's statement that from November 5 until the assassination, no active investigation was conducted.
On November 18 the FBI learned that Oswald recently had been in communication with the Soviet Embassy in Washington
and so advised the Dallas office in the ordinary course of business.
Hosty received this information on the afternoon of November 22, 1963.
Nonreferral of Oswald to the Secret Service.
The Commission has considered carefully the question whether the FBI,
in view of all the information concerning Oswald in its files, should have alerted the Secret Service to Oswald's presence in Dallas
prior to President Kennedy's visit.
The Secret Service and the FBI differ
as to whether Oswald fell within the category of, quote, threats against the President, end quote, which should be referred to the Service.
Robert I Bouck, special agent in charge of the Protective Research Section,
testified that the information available to the Federal Government about Oswald before the assassination would, if known to PRS,
have made Oswald a subject of concern to the Secret Service.
Bouck pointed to a number of characteristics besides Oswald's defection the cumulative effect of which would have been to alert the Secret Service
to potential danger, quote,
I would think his continued association with the Russian Embassy after his return,
his association with the Castro groups would have been of concern to us, a knowledge that he had, I believe,
been courtmartialed for illegal possession of a gun, of a handgun in the Marines,
that he had owned a weapon and did a good deal of hunting or use of it, perhaps in Russia, plus a number of items about his disposition and unreliability of character,
I think all of those, if we had them all together,
would have added up to pointing out a pretty bad individual, and I think that, together, had we known that he had a vantage point
would have seemed somewhat serious to us, even though I must admit, that none of these in themselves would be
would meet our specific criteria, none of them alone. But, it is when you begin adding them up to some degree that you begin to get criteria that, are meaningful.
End quote. Mr. Bouck pointed out, however, that he had no reason to believe that any one Federal agency had access to all this information,
including the significant fact that Oswald was employed in a building which overlooked the motorcade route.
Agent Hosty testified that he was fully aware of the pending Presidential visit to Dallas.
He recalled that the special agent in charge of the Dallas office of the FBI, J. Gordon Shanklin,
had discussed the President's visit on several occasions, including the regular biweekly conference on the morning of November 22
Quote, Mr. Shanklin advised us, among other things,
that in view of the President's visit to Dallas, that if anyone had any indication of any possibility of any acts of violence or any demonstrations against the President,
or Vice President, to immediately notify the Secret Service and confirm it in writing.
He had made the same statement about a week prior at another special conference which we had held.
I don't recall the exact date. It was about a week prior. End quote.
In fact, Hosty participated in transmitting to the Secret Service two pieces of information pertaining to the visit.
Hosty testified that he did not know until the evening of Thursday, November 21, that there was to be a motorcade, however,
and never realized that the motorcade would pass the Texas School Book Depository Building.
He testified that he did not read the newspaper story describing the motorcade route in detail, since he was interested only in the fact
that the motorcade was coming up Main Street, quote, where maybe I could watch it if I had a chance, end quote.
Even if he had recalled that Oswald's place of employment was on the President's route,
Hosty testified that he would not have cited him to the Secret Service as a potential threat to the President. Hosty interpreted his instructions as requiring, quote,
some indication that the person planned to take some action against the safety of the President of the United States or the Vice President. End quote.
In his opinion, none of the information in the FBI files -- Oswald's defection, his Fair Play for Cuba activities in New Orleans,
his lies to Agent Quigley, his recent visit to Mexico City -- indicated that Oswald was capable of violence.
Hosty's initial reaction on hearing that Oswald was a suspect in the assassination, was, quote, shock
complete surprise, end quote, because he had no reason to believe that Oswald, quote,
was capable or potentially an assassin of the President of the United States, end quote.
Shortly after Oswald was apprehended and identified, Hosty's superior sent him to observe the interrogation of Oswald.
Hosty parked his car in the basement of police headquarters and there met an acquaintance, Lt. Jack Revill of the Dallas police force.
The two men disagree about the conversation which took place between them.
They agree that Hosty told Revill
that the FBI had known about Oswald and, in particular, of his presence in Dallas and his employment at the Texas School Book Depository Building.
Revill testified that Hosty said also that the FBI had information that Oswald was, quote, capable of committing this assassination, end quote.
According to Revill, Hosty indicated that he was going to tell this to Lieutenant Wells of the homicide and robbery bureau.
Revill promptly made a memorandum of this conversation in which the quoted statement appears.
His secretary testified that she prepared such a report for him that afternoon and Chief of Police Jesse E. Curry
and District Attorney Henry M. Wade both testified that they saw it later that day.
Hosty has unequivocally denied, first by affidavit and then in his testimony before the Commission,
that he ever said that Oswald was capable of violence, or that he had any information suggesting this.
The only witness to the conversation was Dallas Police Detective V. J. Brian, who was accompanying Revill.
Brian did not hear Hosty make any statement concerning Oswald's capacity to be an assassin
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 3.
Hosty's interpretation of the prevailing FBI instructions on referrals to the Secret Service was defended before the Commission by his superiors.
After summarizing the Bureau's investigative interest in Oswald prior to the assassination, J. Edgar Hoover concluded that, quote,
There was nothing up to the time of the assassination that gave any indication that this man was a dangerous character who might do harm to the President
or to the Vice President, end quote.
Director Hoover emphasized that the first indication of Oswald's capacity for violence
was his attempt on General Walker's life, which did not become known to the FBI until after the assassination.
Both Director Hoover and his assistant, Alan H. Belmont,
stressed also the decision by the Department of State that Oswald should be permitted to return to the United States.
Neither believed that the Bureau investigation of him up to November 22 revealed any information which would have justified referral to the Secret Service.
According to Belmont, when Oswald returned from the Soviet Union, quote,
he indicated that he had learned his lesson,
was disenchanted with Russia, and had a renewed concept -- I am paraphrasing, a renewed concept -- of the American free society.
We talked to him twice.
He likewise indicated he was disenchanted with Russia.
We satisfied ourselves that we had met our requirement, namely to find out whether he had been recruited by Soviet intelligence. The case was closed.
We again exhibited interest on the basis of these contacts with The Worker, Fair Play for Cuba Committee, which are relatively inconsequential.
His activities for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans, we knew, were not of real consequence as he was not connected with any organized activity there.
The interview with him in jail is not significant from the standpoint of whether he had a propensity for violence.
Question: This is the Quigley interview you are talking about?
Answer: Yes. It was a self-serving interview. The visits with the Soviet Embassy were evidently for the purpose of securing a visa,
and he had told us during one of the interviews that he would probably take his wife back to Soviet Russia some time in the future.
He had come back to Dallas. Hosty had established that he had a job, he was working,
and had told Mrs. Paine that when he got the money he was going to take an apartment, when the baby was old enough, he was going to take an apartment, and the family would live together.
He gave evidence of settling down.
Nowhere during the course of this investigation or the information that came to us from other agencies was there any indication of a potential for violence on his part.
Consequently, there was no basis for Hosty to go to Secret Service and advise them of Oswald's presence. End quote
As reflected in this testimony,
the officials of the FBI believed that there was no data in its files which gave warning that Oswald was a source of danger to President Kennedy.
While he had expressed hostility at times toward the State Department, the Marine Corps, and the FBI as agents of the Government,
so far as the FBI knew he had not shown any potential for violence.
Prior to November 22, 1963
no law enforcement agency had any information to connect Oswald with the attempted shooting of General Walker.
It was against this background and consistent with the criteria followed by the FBI prior to November 22
that agents of the FBI in Dallas did not consider Oswald's presence in the Texas School Book Depository Building
overlooking the motorcade route as a source of danger to the President and did not inform the Secret Service of his employment in the Depository Building.
The Commission believes, however,
that the FBI took an unduly restrictive view of its responsibilities in preventive intelligence work, prior to the assassination.
The Commission appreciates the large volume of cases handled by the FBI
636,371 investigative matters during fiscal year 1963
There were no Secret Service criteria which specifically required the referral of Oswald's case to the Secret Service;
nor was there any requirement to report the names of defectors. However, there was much material in the hands of the FBI about Oswald:
the knowledge of his defection, his arrogance and hostility to the United States,
his pro-Castro tendencies, his lies when interrogated by the FBI,
his trip to Mexico where he was in contact with Soviet authorities,
his presence in the School Book Depository job and its location along the route of the motorcade.
All this does seem to amount to enough to have induced an alert agency, such as the FBI,
possessed of this information to list Oswald as a potential threat to the safety of the President.
This conclusion may be tinged with hindsight, but
it stated primarily to direct the thought of those responsible for the future safety of our Presidents to the need for a more imaginative
and less narrow interpretation of their responsibilities.
It is the conclusion of the Commission that, even in the absence of Secret Service criteria
which specifically required the referral of such a case as Oswald's to the Secret Service,
a more alert and carefully considered treatment of the Oswald case by the Bureau might have brought about such a referral.
Had such a review been undertaken by the FBI,
there might conceivably have been additional investigation of the Oswald case between November 5 and November 22.
Agent Hosty testified
that several matters brought to his attention in late October and early November, including the visit to the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City,
required further attention.
Under proper procedures knowledge of the pending Presidential visit might have prompted Hosty
to have made more vigorous efforts to locate Oswald's roominghouse address in Dallas and to interview him regarding these unresolved matters.
The formal FBI instructions to its agents outlining the information to be referred to the Secret Service were too narrow at the time of the assassination.
While the Secret Service bears the principal responsibility for this failure,
the FBI instructions did not reflect fully the Secret Service's need for information regarding potential threats.
The handbook referred thus to, quote, the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President, end quote.
It is clear from Hosty's testimony that this was construed, at least by him,
as requiring evidence of a plan or conspiracy to injure the President.
Efforts made by the Bureau since the assassination, on the other hand,
reflect keen awareness of the necessity of communicating a much wider range of intelligence information to the Service.
Most important, notwithstanding that both agencies have professed to the Commission that the liaison between them was close and fully sufficient,
the Commission does not believe that the liaison between the FBI and the Secret Service prior to the assassination was as effective as it should have been.
The FBI Manual of Instructions provided, quote, Liaison With Other Government Agencies
To insure adequate and effective liaison arrangements,
each SAC should specifically designate an Agent (or Agents) to be responsible for developing
and maintaining liaison with other Federal Agencies. This liaison should take into consideration
FBI-agency community of interests, location of agency head quarters, and the responsiveness of agency representatives.
In each instance, liaison contacts should be developed to include a close friendly relationship,
mutual understanding of FBI and agency jurisdictions, and an indicated willingness by the agency representative
to coordinate activities and to discuss problems of mutual interest.
Each field office should determine those Federal agencies which are represented locally and with which liaison should be conducted. End quote.
The testimony reveals that liaison responsibilities in connection with the President's visit
were discussed twice officially by the special agent in charge of the FBI office in Dallas. As discussed in chapter 2,
some limited information was made available to the Secret Service. But there was no fully adequate liaison between the two agencies. Indeed,
the Commission believes that the liaison between all Federal agencies responsible for Presidential protection should be improved.
Other Protective Measures and Aspects of Secret Service Performance
The President's trip to Dallas called into play many standard operating procedures of the Secret Service in addition to its preventive intelligence operations.
Examination of these procedures shows that in most respects they were well conceived and ably executed by the personnel of the Service.
Against the background of the critical events of November 22, however,
certain shortcomings and lapses from the high standards which the Commission believes should prevail in the field of Presidential protection are evident.
Advance preparations.
The advance preparations in Dallas by Agent Winston G. Lawson of the White House detail have been described in chapter 2.
With the assistance of Agent in Charge Sorrels of the Dallas field office of the Secret Service,
Lawson was responsible for working out a great many arrangements for the President's trip.
The Service prefers to have two agents perform advance preparations.
In the case of Dallas, because President Kennedy had scheduled visits to five Texas cities
and had also scheduled visits to other parts of the country immediately before the Texas trip,
there were not enough men available to permit two agents to be assigned to all the advance work.
Agent Lawson did the advance work alone from November 13 to November 18, when he was joined by Agent David B. Grant,
who had just completed advance work on the President's trip to Tampa.
The Commission concludes that the most significant advance arrangements for the President's trip were soundly planned.
In particular, the Commission believes that the motorcade route selected by Agent Lawson, upon the advice of Agent in Charge Sorrels
and with the concurrence of the Dallas police, was entirely appropriate, in view of the known desires of the President.
There were far safer routes via freeways directly to the Trade Mart,
but these routes would not have been in accordance with the White House staff instructions given the Secret Service for a desirable motorcade route.
Much of Lawson's time was taken with establishing adequate security over the motorcade route and at the two places where the President would stop,
Love Field and the Trade Mart.
by these Secret Service agents with the cooperation of the Dallas police and other local law enforcement agents, were carefully executed.
Since the President was to be at the Trade Mart longer than at any other location in Dallas and in view of the security hazards presented by the building,
the Secret Service correctly gave particular attention in the advance preparations to those arrangements.
The Commission also regards the security arrangements worked out by Lawson and Sorrels at Love Field as entirely adequate.
The Commission believes, however,
that the Secret Service has inadequately defined the responsibilities of its advance agents, who have been given broad discretion
to determine what matters require attention in making advance preparations and to decide what action to take.
Agent Lawson was not given written instructions concerning the Dallas trip or advice about any peculiar problems which it might involve;
all instructions from higher authority were communicated to him orally.
He did not have a checklist of the tasks he was expected to accomplish, either by his own efforts or with the cooperation of local authorities.
The only systematic supervision of the activities of the advance agent
has been that provided by a requirement that he file interim and final reports on each advance assignment.
The interim report must be in the hands of the agent supervising the protective group traveling with the President
long enough before his departure to apprise him of any particular problems encountered and the responsive action taken.
Agent Lawson's interim report was received by Agent Kellerman on November 20, the day before departure on the Texas trip.
The Secret Service has advised the Commission that no unusual precautions were taken for the Dallas trip, and that, quote,
the precautions taken for the President's trip were the usual safeguards employed on trips of this kind in the United States during the previous year, end quote.
Special Agent in Charge Sorrels testified that the advance preparations followed on this occasion were, quote, pretty much the same, end quote,
as those followed in 1936 during a trip to Dallas by President Roosevelt,
which was Sorrels' first important assignment in connection with Presidential work.
In view of the constant change in the nature of threats to the President and the diversity of the dangers which may arise in the various cities within the United States,
the Commission believes that standard procedures in use for many years and applied in all parts of the country may not be sufficient.
There is, for example, no Secret Service arrangement for evaluating before a trip particular difficulties that might be anticipated,
which would bring to bear the judgment and experience of members of the White House detail other than the advance agent.
Constant reevaluation of procedures, with attention to special problems and the development of instructions specific to particular trips
would be a desirable innovation.
Liaison with local law enforcement authorities.
In the description of the important aspects of the advance preparations,
there have been references to the numerous discussions between Secret Service representatives and the Dallas Police Department.
The wholehearted support of these local authorities was indispensable to the Service in carrying out its duties.
The Service had 28 agents participating in the Dallas visit.
Agent Lawson's advance planning called for the deployment of almost 600 members of the Dallas Police Department,
Fire Department, County Sheriff's Department, and the Texas Department of Public Safety.
Despite this dependence on local authorities, which would be substantially the same on a visit by the President to any large city,
the Secret Service did not at the time of the assassination have any established procedure governing its relationships with them.
It had no prepared checklist of matters to be covered with local police on such visits to metropolitan areas
and no written description of the role the local police were expected to perform.
Discussions with the Dallas authorities and requests made of them were entirely informal.
The Commission believes
that a more formal statement of assigned responsibilities, supplemented in each case to reflect the peculiar conditions of each Presidential trip
is essential. This would help to eliminate varying interpretations of Secret Service instructions by different local law enforcement representatives. For example,
while the Secret Service representatives in Dallas
asked the police to station guards at each overpass to keep, quote, unauthorized personnel, end quote, off, this term was not defined.
At some overpasses all persons were excluded
while on the overpass overlooking the assassination scene railroad and yard terminal workmen were permitted to remain under police supervision,
as discussed in chapter 3.
Assistant Chief Batchelor of the Dallas police noted the absence of any formal statement by the Secret Service of specific work assigned to the police
and suggested the desirability of such a statement.
Agent Lawson agreed that such a procedure would assist him and other agents in fulfilling their responsibilities as advance agents.
Check of buildings along route of motorcade.
Agent Lawson did not arrange for a prior inspection of buildings along the motorcade route,
either by police or by custodians of the buildings, since it was not the usual practice of the Secret Service to do so.
The Chief of the Service has provided the Commission a detailed explanation of this policy, quote,
Except for inauguration or other parades involving foreign dignitaries accompanied by the President in Washington,
it has not been the practice of the Secret Service to make surveys or checks of buildings along the route of a Presidential motorcade.
For the inauguration and certain other parades in Washington where the traditional route is known to the public long in advance of the event,
buildings along the route can be checked by teams of law enforcement officers, and armed guards are posted along the route as appropriate.
But on out-of-town trips where the route is decided on and made public only a few days in advance,
buildings are not checked either by Secret Service agents or by any other law enforcement officers at the request of the Secret Service.
With the number of men available to the Secret Service and the time available, surveys of hundreds of buildings and thousands of windows is not practical.
In Dallas the route selected necessarily involved passing through the principal downtown section between tall buildings.
While certain streets thought to be too narrow could be avoided and other choices made,
it was not practical to select a route where the President could not be seen from roofs or windows of buildings.
At the two places in Dallas where the President would remain for a period of time, Love Field and the Trade Mart,
arrangements were made for building and roof security by posting police officers where appropriate.
Similar arrangements for a motorcade of ten miles, including many blocks of tall commercial buildings is not practical.
Nor is it practical to prevent people from entering such buildings, or to limit access in every building to those employed or having business there.
Even if it were possible with a vastly larger force of security officers to do so, many observers have felt
that such a procedure would not be consistent with the nature and purpose of the motorcade to let the people see their President and to welcome him to their city.
In accordance with its regular procedures, no survey or other check was made by the Secret Service, or by any other law enforcement agency at its request,
of the Texas School Book Depository Building or those employed there prior to the time the President was shot. End quote.
This justification of the Secret Service's standing policy is not persuasive.
The danger from a concealed sniper on the Dallas trip was of concern to those who had considered the problem.
President Kennedy himself had mentioned it that morning, as had Agent Sorrels when he and Agent Lawson were fixing the motorcade route.
Admittedly, protective measures cannot ordinarily be taken with regard to all buildings along a motorcade route.
Levels of risk can be determined, however, as has been confirmed by building surveys made since the assassination for the Department of the Treasury.
An attempt to cover only the most obvious points of possible ambush along the route in Dallas might well have included the Texas School Book Depository Building.
Instead of such advance precautions, the Secret Service depended in part on the efforts of local law enforcement personnel stationed along the route.
In addition, Secret Service agents riding in the motorcade were trained to scan buildings as part of their general observation of the crowd of spectators.
These substitute measures were of limited value. Agent Lawson was unable to state whether he had actually instructed
the Dallas police to scan windows of buildings lining the motorcade route, although it was his usual practice to do so.
If such instructions were in fact given, they were not effectively carried out.
Television films taken of parts of the motorcade by a Dallas television station
show the foot patrolmen facing the passing motorcade, and not the adjacent crowds and buildings, as the procession passed.
Three officers from the Dallas Police Department were assigned to the intersection of Elm and Houston
during the morning of November 22 prior to the motorcade.
All received their instructions early in the morning from Capt. P. W. Lawrence of the traffic division.
According to Captain Lawrence, quote,
I then told the officers that their primary duty was traffic and crowd control and that they should be alert for any persons who might attempt to throw anything
and although it was not a violation of the law to carry a placard, that they were not to tolerate any actions such as the Stevenson incident
and arrest any person who might attempt to throw anything or try to get at the President and his party;
paying particular attention to the crowd for any unusual activity.
I stressed the fact that this was our President and he should be shown every respect due his position and that it was our duty to see that this was done.
End quote. Captain Lawrence was not instructed to have his men watch buildings along the motorcade route and did not mention the observation of buildings to them.
The three officers confirm that their primary concern was crowd and traffic control,
and that they had no opportunity to scan the windows of the Depository or any other building in the vicinity of Elm and Houston when the motorcade was passing.
They had, however, occasionally observed the windows of buildings in the area before the motorcade arrived, in accordance with their own understanding of their function.
As the motorcade approached Elm Street
there were several Secret Service agents in it who shared the responsibility of scanning the windows of nearby buildings.
Agent Sorrels, riding in the lead car, did observe the Texas School Book Depository Building as he passed by,
at least for a sufficient number of seconds to gain a, quote, general impression, end quote, of the lack of any unusual activity.
He was handicapped, however, by the fact that he was riding in a closed car whose roof at times obscured his view.
Lawson, also in the lead car, did not scan any buildings since an important part of his job was to look backward at the President's car.
Lawson stated that he, quote, was looking back a good deal of the time,
watching his car, watching the sides, watching the crowds, giving advice or asking advice from the Chief
and also looking ahead to the known hazards like overpasses, under-passes, railroads, et cetera, end quote.
Agent Roy H. Kellerman, riding in the front seat of the Presidential car,
stated that he scanned the Depository Building, but not sufficiently to be alerted by anything in the windows or on the roof.
The agents in the follow-up car also were expected to scan adjacent buildings.
However, the Commission does not believe that agents stationed in a car behind the Presidential car,
who must concentrate primarily on the possibility of threats from crowds along the route, provide a significant safeguard against dangers in nearby buildings.
Conduct of Secret Service agents in Fort Worth on November 22.
In the early morning hours on November 22, 1963,
in Fort Worth, there occurred a breach of discipline by some members of the Secret Service who were officially traveling with the President.
After the President had retired at his hotel,
nine agents who were off duty went to the nearby Fort Worth Press Club at midnight or slightly thereafter, expecting to obtain food;
they had little opportunity to eat during the day. No food was available at the Press Club.
All of the agents stayed for a drink of beer, or in several cases, a mixed drink.
According to their affidavits, the drinking in no case amounted to more than three glasses of beer or one and a half mixed drinks,
and others who were present say that no agent was inebriated or acted improperly.
The statements of the agents involved are supported by statements of members of the Fort Worth press who accompanied or observed them
and by a Secret Service investigation.
According to their statements, the agents remained at the Press Club for periods varying from 30 minutes to an hour and a half,
and the last agent left the Press Club by 2 a.m.
Two of the nine agents returned to their rooms. The seven others proceeded to an establishment called the Cellar Coffee House,
described by some as a beatnik place and by its manager as, quote, a unique showplace with continuous light entertainment all night
serving only coffee, fruit juices and no hard liquors or beer, end quote.
There is no indication that any of the agents who visited the Cellar Coffee House had any intoxicating drink at that establishment.
Most of the agents were there from about 1:30 or 1:45 a.m. to about 2:45 or 3 a.m.;
one agent was there from 2 until 5 a.m.
The lobby of the hotel and the areas adjacent to the quarters of the President were guarded during the night
by members of the midnight to 8 a.m. shift of the White House detail.
These agents were each relieved for a half hour break during the night.
Three members of this shift separately took this opportunity to visit the Cellar Coffee House.
Only one stayed as long as a half hour, and none had any beverage there.
Chief Rowley testified that agents on duty in such a situation usually stay within the building during their relief,
but that their visits to the Cellar were, quote, neither consistent nor inconsistent, end quote, with their duty.
Each of the agents who visited the Press Club or the Cellar Coffee House (apart from the three members of the midnight shift)
had duty assignments beginning no later than 8 a.m. that morning.
President Kennedy was scheduled to speak across the street from his hotel in Fort Worth at 8:30 a.m.
and then at a breakfast, after which the entourage would proceed to Dallas.
In Dallas, one of the nine agents was assigned to assist in security measures at Love Field, and four had protective assignments at the Trade Mart.
The remaining four had key responsibilities as members of the complement of the follow-up car in the motorcade.
Three of these agents occupied positions on the running boards of the car, and the fourth was seated in the car.
The supervisor of each of the off-duty agents who visited the Press Club or the Cellar Coffee House
advised, in the course of the Secret Service investigation of these events, that each agent reported for duty on time,
with full possession of his mental and physical capabilities and entirely ready for the performance of his assigned duties. Chief Rowley testified that,
as a result of the investigation he ordered, he was satisfied that each of the agents performed his duties in an entirely satisfactory manner
and that their conduct the night before did not impede their actions on duty
or in the slightest way prevent them from taking any action that might have averted the tragedy.
However, Chief Rowley did not condone the action of the off-duty agents, particularly since it violated a regulation of the Secret Service,
which provides, quote, Liquor, use of
a. Employees are strictly enjoined to refrain from the use of intoxicating liquor
during the hours they are officially employed at their post of duty, or when they may reasonably expect that they may be called upon to perform an official duty.
During entire periods of travel status,
the special agent is officially employed and should not use liquor, until the completion of all of his official duties for the day,
after which time a very moderate use of liquor will not be considered a violation. However, all members of the White House Detail
and special agents cooperating with them on Presidential and similar protective assignments are considered to be subject to call for official duty
at any time while in travel status.
Therefore, the use of intoxicating liquor of any kind, including beer and wine, by members of the White House Detail
and special agents cooperating with them, or by special agents on similar assignments, while they are in a travel status, is prohibited. End quote.
The regulations provide further that, quote, violation or slight disregard, end quote, of these provisions, quote,
will be cause for removal from the Service, end quote.
Chief Rowley testified
that under ordinary circumstances he would have taken disciplinary action against those agents who had been drinking in clear violation of the regulation.
However, he felt that any disciplinary action might have given rise
to an inference that the violation of the regulation had contributed to the tragic events of November 22.
Since he was convinced that this was not the case, he believed that it would be unfair to the agents and their families to take explicit disciplinary measures.
He felt that each agent recognized the seriousness of the infraction and that there was no danger of a repetition.
The Commission recognizes that the responsibilities of members of the White House detail of the Secret Service are arduous.
They work long, hard hours, under very great strain, and must travel frequently.
It might seem harsh to circumscribe their opportunities for relaxation.
Yet their role of protecting the President is so important to the well-being of the country
that it is reasonable to expect them to meet very high standards of personal conduct,
so that nothing can interfere with their bringing to their task the finest qualities and maximum resources of mind and body.
This is the salutary goal to which the Secret Service regulation is directed,
when it absolutely forbids drinking by any agent accompanying the President on a trip.
Nor is this goal served when agents remain out until early morning hours, and lose the opportunity to get a reasonable amount of sleep.
It is conceivable that those men who had little sleep, and who had consumed alcoholic beverages, even in limited quantities,
might have been more alert in the Dallas motorcade if they had retired promptly in Fort Worth.
However, there is no evidence that these men failed to take any action in Dallas within their power that would have averted the tragedy.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 4.
The motorcade in Dallas.
Rigorous security precautions had been arranged at Love Field with the local law enforcement authorities by Agents Sorrels and Lawson.
These precautions included reserving a ceremonial area for the Presidential party,
stationing police on the rooftops of all buildings overlooking the reception area,
and detailing police in civilian clothes to be scattered throughout the sizable crowd.
When President and Mrs. Kennedy shook hands with members of the public along the fences surrounding the reception area, they were closely guarded by Secret Service agents
who responded to the unplanned event with dispatch.
As described in chapter 2, the President directed that his car stop on two occasions during the motorcade so that he could greet members of the public.
At these stops, agents from the Presidential follow-up car stood between the President and the public,
and on one occasion Agent Kellerman left the front seat of the President's car to take a similar position.
The Commission regards such impromptu stops as presenting an unnecessary danger,
but finds that the Secret Service agents did all that could have been done to take protective measures.
The Presidential limousine.
The limousine used by President Kennedy in Dallas was a convertible with a detachable, rigid plastic "bubble" top
which was neither bulletproof nor bullet resistant.
The last Presidential vehicle with any protection against small-arms fire left the White House in 1953.
It was not then replaced because the state of the art did not permit the development of a bulletproof top of sufficiently light weight
to permit its removal on those occasions when the President wished to ride in an open car.
The Secret Service believed that it was very doubtful that any President would ride regularly in a vehicle with a fixed top, even though transparent.
Since the assassination, the Secret Service, with the assistance of other Federal agencies and of private industry,
has developed a vehicle for the better protection of the President.
Access to passenger compartment of Presidential car.
On occasion the Secret Service has been permitted to have an agent riding in the passenger compartment with the President.
Presidents have made it clear, however, that they did not favor this or any other arrangement which interferes with the privacy of the President and his guests.
The Secret Service has therefore suggested this practice only on extraordinary occasions.
Without attempting to prescribe or recommend specific measures which should be employed for the future protection of Presidents,
the Commission does believe that there are aspects of the protective measures employed in the motorcade at Dallas which deserve special comment.
The Presidential vehicle in use in Dallas, described in chapter 2,
had no special design or equipment which would have permitted the Secret Service agent riding in the driver's compartment
to move into the passenger section without hindrance or delay. Had the vehicle been so designed it is possible that an agent riding in the front seat
could have reached the President in time to protect him from the second and fatal shot to hit the President.
However, such access to the President was interfered with both by the metal bar some 15 inches above the back of the front seat
and by the passengers in the jump seats.
In contrast, the Vice Presidential vehicle, although not specially designed for that purpose,
had no passenger in a jump seat between Agent Youngblood and Vice President Johnson to interfere with Agent Youngblood's ability
to take a protective position in the passenger compartment before the third shot was fired.
The assassination suggests that it would have been of prime importance
in the protection of the President if the Presidential car permitted immediate access to the President by a Secret Service agent at the first sign of danger.
At that time the agents on the framing boards of the follow-up car were expected to perform such a function.
However, these agents could not reach the President's car when it was traveling at an appreciable rate of speed.
Even if the car is traveling more slowly, the delay involved in reaching the President may be crucial.
It is clear that at the time of the shots in Dallas, Agent Clinton J. Hill leaped to the President's rescue as quickly as humanly possible.
Even so, analysis of the motion picture films taken by amateur photographer Zapruder
reveals that Hill first placed his hand on the Presidential car at frame 343, 30 frames
and therefore approximately 1.6 seconds after the President was shot in the head.
About 3.7 seconds after the President received this wound,
Hill had both feet on the car and was climbing aboard to assist President and Mrs. Kennedy.
Planning for motorcade contingencies.
In response to inquiry by the Commission regarding the instructions to agents in a motorcade
of emergency procedures to be taken in a contingency such as that which actually occurred, the Secret Service responded, quote,
The Secret Service has consistently followed two general principles in emergencies involving the President.
All agents are so instructed.
The first duty of the agents in the motorcade is to attempt to cover the President as closely as possible and practicable
and to shield him by attempting to place themselves between the President and any source of danger.
Secondly, agents are instructed to remove the President as quickly as possible from known or impending danger.
Agents are instructed that it is not their responsibility to investigate or evaluate a present danger,
but to consider any untoward circumstances as serious and to afford the President maximum protection at all times.
No responsibility rests upon those agents near the President for the identification or arrest of any assassin or an attacker.
Their primary responsibility is to stay with and protect the President.
Beyond these two principles the Secret Service believes a detailed contingency or emergency plan is not feasible
because the variations possible preclude effective planning.
A number of steps are taken, however, to permit appropriate steps to be taken in an emergency.
For instance, the lead car always is manned by Secret Service agents familiar with the area and with local law enforcement officials;
the radio net in use in motorcades is elaborate and permits a number of different means of communication with various local points.
A doctor is in the motorcade.
This basic approach to the problem of planning for emergencies is sound.
Any effort to prepare detailed contingency plans might well have the undesirable effect of inhibiting quick and imaginative responses.
If the advance preparation is thorough, and the protective devices and techniques employed are sound,
those in command should be able to direct the response appropriate to the emergency. The Commission finds that the Secret Service agents in the motorcade
who were immediately responsible for the President's safety reacted promptly at the time the shots were fired.
Their actions demonstrate that the President and the Nation can expect courage and devotion to duty from the agents of the Secret Service.
Recommendations.
The Commission's review of the provisions for Presidential protection at the time of President Kennedy's trip to Dallas demonstrates the need for substantial improvements.
Since the assassination, the Secret Service and the Department of the Treasury
have properly taken the initiative in reexamining major aspects of Presidential protection.
Many changes have already been made and others are contemplated, some of them in response to the Commission's questions and informal suggestions.
Assassination a Federal Crime
There was no Federal criminal jurisdiction over the assassination of President Kennedy.
Had there been reason to believe that the assassination was the result of a conspiracy, Federal jurisdiction could have been asserted;
it has long been a Federal crime to conspire to injure any Federal officer, on account of, or while he is engaged in, the lawful discharge of the duties of his office.
Murder of the President has never been covered by Federal law, however, so that once it became reasonably clear that the killing was the act of a single person,
the State of Texas had exclusive jurisdiction.
It is anomalous that Congress has legislated in other ways touching upon the safety of the Chief Executive or other Federal officers,
without making an attack on the President a crime. Threatening harm to the President is a Federal offense,
as is advocacy of the overthrow of the Government by the assassination of any of its officers.
The murder of Federal judges, U.S. attorneys and marshals, and a number of other specifically designated
Federal law enforcement officers is a Federal crime.
Equally anomalous are statutory provisions which specifically authorize the Secret Service to protect the President,
without authorizing it to arrest anyone who harms him. The same provisions authorize the Service to arrest without warrant
persons committing certain offenses, including counterfeiting and certain frauds involving Federal checks or securities.
The Commission agrees with the Secret Service that it should be authorized to make arrests without warrant
for all offenses within its jurisdiction, as are FBI agents and Federal marshals.
There have been a number of efforts to make assassination a Federal crime, particularly after the assassination of President McKinley
and the attempt on the life of President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt.
In 1902 bills passed both Houses of Congress but failed of enactment when the Senate refused to accept the conference report.
A number of bills were introduced immediately following the assassination of President Kennedy.
The Commission recommends to the Congress that it adopt legislation which would:
Punish the murder or manslaughter of, attempt or conspiracy to murder, kidnaping of and assault upon
the President, Vice President, or other officer next in the order of succession to the Office of President, the President-elect and the Vice-President-elect,
whether or not the act is committed while the victim is in the performance of his official duties or on account of such performance.
Such a statute would cover the President and Vice President or, in the absence of a Vice President, the person next in order of succession.
During the period between election and inauguration, the President-elect and Vice-President-elect would also be covered.
Restricting the coverage in this way would avoid unnecessary controversy over the inclusion or exclusion of other officials who are in the order of succession
or who hold important governmental posts.
In addition, the restriction would probably eliminate a need for the requirement which has been urged as necessary for the exercise of Federal power,
that the hostile act occur while the victim is engaged in or because of the performance of official duties.
The governmental consequences of assassination of one of the specified officials give the United States ample power to act for its own protection.
The activities of the victim at the time an assassination occurs and the motive for the assassination
bear no relationship to the injury to the United States which follows from the act.
This point was ably made in the 1902 debate by Senator George F. Hoar, the sponsor of the Senate bill, quote,
what this bill means to punish is the crime of interruption of the Government of the United States and the destruction of its security by striking down the life
of the person who is actually in the exercise of the executive power, or
of such persons as have been constitutionally and lawfully provided to succeed thereto in case of a vacancy. It is important to this country
that the interruption shall not take place for an hour, end quote.
Enactment of this statute would mean that the investigation of any of the acts covered and of the possibility of a further attempt
would be conducted by Federal law enforcement officials, in particular, the FBI with the assistance of the Secret Service.
At present, Federal agencies participate only upon the sufferance of the local authorities.
While the police work of the Dallas authorities in the early identification and apprehension of Oswald was both efficient and prompt,
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who strongly supports such legislation, testified that the absence of clear Federal jurisdiction
over the assassination of President Kennedy led to embarrassment and confusion in the subsequent investigation by Federal and local authorities.
In addition, the proposed legislation will insure
that any suspects who are arrested will be Federal prisoners, subject to Federal protection from vigilante justice and other threats.
Committee of Cabinet Officers. As our Government has become more complex,
agencies other than the Secret Service have become involved in phases of the overall problem of protecting our national leaders.
The FBI is the major domestic investigating agency of the United States,
while the CIA has the primary responsibility for collecting intelligence overseas to supplement information acquired by the Department of State.
The Secret Service must rely in large part
The Commission believes that it is necessary to improve the cooperation among these agencies
and to emphasize that the task of Presidential protection is one of broad national concern.
The Commission suggests that consideration might be given to assigning to a Cabinet-level committee or the National Security Council
(which is responsible for advising the President respecting the coordination
of departmental policies relating to the national security) the responsibility to review and oversee the protective activities of the Secret Service
and the other Federal agencies that assist in safeguarding the President. The Committee should include the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General,
and, if the Council is used, arrangements should be made for the attendance of the Secretary of the Treasury
and the Attorney General at any meetings which are concerned with Presidential protection.
The Council already includes, in addition to the President and Vice President, the Secretaries of State and Defense and has a competent staff.
The foremost assignment of the Committee would be to insure that the maximum resources of the Federal Government are fully engaged in the job of protecting the President,
by defining responsibilities clearly and overseeing their execution.
Major needs of personnel or other resources might be met more easily on its recommendation than they have been in the past.
The Committee would be able to provide guidance in defining the general nature of domestic and foreign dangers to Presidential security.
As improvements are recommended for the advance detection of potential threats to the President, it could act as a final review board.
The expert assistance and resources which it could draw upon would be particularly desirable in this complex and sensitive area.
This arrangement would provide a continuing high-level contact for agencies that may wish to consult respecting particular protective measures.
For various reasons the Secret Service has functioned largely as an informal part of the White House staff, with the result
that it has been unable, as a practical matter, to exercise sufficient influence over the security precautions which surround Presidential activities.
A Cabinet-level committee which is actively concerned with these problems would be able to discuss these matters more effectively with the President.
Responsibilities for Presidential Protection
The assignment of the responsibility of protecting the President to an agency of the Department of the Treasury was largely an historical accident.
The Secret Service was organized as a division of the Department of the Treasury in 1865, to deal with counterfeiting.
In 1894,
while investigating a plot to assassinate President Cleveland, the Service assigned a small protective detail of agents to the White House.
Secret Service men accompanied the President and his family to their vacation home in Massachusetts
and special details protected him in Washington, on trips, and at special functions.
These informal and part-time arrangements led to more systematic protection in 1902, after the assassination of President McKinley;
the Secret Service, then the only Federal investigative agency, assumed full-time responsibility for the safety of the President.
Since that time, the Secret Service has had and exercised responsibility for the physical protection of the President
and also for the preventive investigation of potential threats against the President.
Although the Secret Service has had the primary responsibility for the protection of the President,
the FBI, which was established within the Department of Justice in 1908, has had in recent years an increasingly important role to play.
In the appropriations of the FBI there has recurred annually an item for the, quote, protection of the person of the President of the United States, end quote,
which first appeared in the appropriation of the Department of Justice in 1910 under the heading, quote, Miscellaneous Objects, end quote.
Although the FBI is not charged with the physical protection of the President, it does have an assignment, as do other Government agencies,
in the field of preventive investigation in regard to the President's security.
As discussed above, the Bureau has attempted to meet its responsibilities in this field by spelling out in its Handbook
the procedures which its agents are to follow in connection with information received, quote,
indicating the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President, end quote, or other protected persons.
With two Federal agencies operating in the same general field of preventive investigation,
questions inevitably arise as to the scope of each agency's authority and responsibility.
As the testimony of J. Edgar Hoover and other Bureau officials revealed, the FBI did not believe that its directive required the Bureau
to notify the Secret Service of the substantial information about Lee Harvey Oswald which the FBI had accumulated
before the President reached Dallas.
On the other hand, the Secret Service had no knowledge whatever of Oswald, his background, or his employment at the Book Depository,
and Robert I. Bouck, who was in charge of the Protective Research Section of the Secret Service, believed that the accumulation of the facts known to the FBI
should have constituted a sufficient basis to warn the Secret Service of the Oswald risk.
The Commission believes that both the FBI and the Secret Service have too narrowly construed their respective responsibilities.
The Commission has the impression
that too much emphasis is placed by both on the investigation of specific threats by individuals and not enough on dangers from other sources.
In addition, the Commission has concluded that the Secret Service particularly tends to be the passive recipient of information
regarding such threats and that its Protective Research Section is not adequately staffed or equipped
to conduct the wider investigative work that is required today for the security of the President.
During the period the Commission was giving thought to this situation,
the Commission received a number of proposals designed to improve current arrangements for protecting the President.
These proposals included suggestions to locate exclusive responsibility for all phases of the work
in one or another Government agency, to clarify the division of authority between the agencies involved, and to retain the existing system
but expand both the scope and the operations of the existing agencies, particularly those of the Secret Service and the FBI.
It has been pointed out that the FBI, as our chief investigative agency,
is properly manned and equipped to carry on extensive information gathering functions within the United States.
It was also suggested that it would take a substantial period of time for the Secret Service to build up the experience and skills necessary to meet the problem.
Consequently the suggestion has been made, on the one hand, that all preventive investigative functions relating to the security of the President
should be transferred to the FBI,
leaving with the Secret Service only the responsibility for the physical protection of the President, that is, the guarding function alone.
On the other hand, it is urged that all features of the protection of the President and his family should be committed to an elite and independent corps.
It is also contended that the agents should be intimately associated with the life of the Presidential family
in all its ramifications and alert to every danger that might befall it,
and ready at any instant to hazard great danger to themselves in the performance of their tremendous responsibility.
It is suggested that an organization shorn of its power to investigate all the possibilities of danger to the President
and becoming merely the recipient of information gathered by others would become limited solely to acts of physical alertness and personal courage
incident to its responsibilities.
So circumscribed, it could not maintain the esprit de corps or the necessary alertness for this unique and challenging responsibility.
While in accordance with its mandate
this Commission has necessarily examined into the functioning of the various Federal agencies concerned with the tragic trip of President Kennedy to Dallas
and while it has arrived at certain conclusions in respect thereto, it seems clear
that it was not within the Commission's responsibility to make specific recommendations as to the long-range organization of the President's protection,
except as conclusions flowing directly from its examination of the President's assassination can be drawn.
The Commission was not asked to apply itself as did the Hoover Commission in 1949,
for examples to a determination of the optimum organization of the President's protection.
It would have been necessary for the Commission to take considerable testimony, much of it extraneous to the facts of the assassination of President Kennedy,
to put it in a position to reach final conclusions in this respect.
There are always dangers of divided responsibility,
duplication, and confusion of authority where more than one agency is operating in the same field; but on the other hand
the protection of the President is in a real sense a Government-wide responsibility which must necessarily assumed by the Department of State,
the FBI, the CIA, and the military intelligence agencies as well as the Secret Service.
Moreover, a number of imponderable questions have to be weighed if any change in the intimate association now established
between the Secret Service and the President and his family is contemplated.
These considerations have induced the Commission to believe
that the determination of whether or not there should be a relocation of responsibilities and functions should be left to the Executive and the Congress,
perhaps upon recommendations based on further studies by the Cabinet-level committee recommended above or the National Security Council.
Pending any such determination, however, this Commission is convinced of the necessity of better coordination
and direction of the activities of all existing agencies of Government which are in a position to and do, furnish information
and services related to the security of the President.
The Commission feels the Secret Service and the FBI, as well as the State Department and the CIA when the President travels abroad,
could improve their existing capacities and procedures so as to lessen the chances of assassination.
Without, therefore, coming to final conclusions respecting the long-range organization of the President's security,
the Commission believes that the facts of the assassination of President Kennedy point to certain measures which,
while assuming no radical relocation of responsibilities,
can and should be recommended by this Commission in the interest of the more efficient protection of the President.
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit librivox dot org. Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report.
By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 5.
General Supervision of the Secret Service
The intimacy of the Secret Service's relationship to the White House
and the dissimilarity of its protective functions to most activities of the Department of the Treasury
have made it difficult for the Treasury to maintain close and continuing supervision.
The Commission believes that the recommended Cabinet-level committee will help to correct many of the major deficiencies of supervision
disclosed by the Commission's investigation. Other measures should be taken as well to improve the overall operation of the Secret Service.
Daily supervision of the operations of the Secret Service within the Department of the Treasury should be improved.
The Chief of the Service now reports to the Secretary of the Treasury
through an Assistant Secretary whose duties also include the direct supervision of the Bureau of the Mint
and the Department's Employment Policy Program, and who also represents the Secretary of the Treasury on various committees and groups.
The incumbent has no technical qualifications in the area of Presidential protection.
The Commission recommends that the Secretary of the Treasury appoint a special assistant with the responsibility of supervising the Service.
This special assistant should be required to have sufficient stature and experience in law enforcement, intelligence, or allied fields
to be able to provide effective continuing supervision
and to keep the Secretary fully informed regarding all significant developments relating to Presidential protection.
This report has already pointed out several respects
in which the Commission believes that the Secret Service has operated with insufficient planning or control.
Actions by the Service since the assassination indicate its awareness of the necessity for substantial improvement in its administration.
A formal and thorough description of the responsibilities of the advance agent is now in preparation by the Service.
Work is going forward
toward the preparation of formal understandings of the respective roles of the Secret Service and other agencies with which it collaborates
or from which it derives assistance and support.
The Commission urges that the Service continue this effort to overhaul and define its procedures.
While manuals and memoranda are no guarantee of effective operations,
no sizable organization can achieve efficiency without the careful analysis and demarcation of responsibility
that is reflected in definite and comprehensive operating procedures.
The Commission also recommends
that the Secret Service consciously set about the task of inculcating and maintaining the highest standard of excellence and esprit, for all of its personnel.
This involves tight and unswerving discipline as well as the promotion of an outstanding degree of dedication and loyalty to duty.
The Commission emphasizes that it finds no causal connection between the assassination
and the breach of regulations which occurred on the night of November 21 at Fort Worth.
Nevertheless, such a breach, in which so many agents participated,
is not consistent with the standards which the responsibilities of the Secret Service require it to meet.
Preventive Intelligence
In attempting to identify those individuals who might prove a danger to the President,
the Secret Service has largely been the passive recipient of threatening communications to the President
and reports from other agencies which independently evaluate their information for potential sources of danger.
This was the consequence of the Service's lack of an adequate investigative staff,
its inability to process large amounts of data, and its failure to provide specific descriptions of the kind of information it sought.
The Secret Service has embarked upon a complete overhaul of its research activities. The staff of the Protective Research Section (PRS)
has been augmented, and a Secret Service inspector has been put in charge of this operation. With the assistance of the President's Office of Science and Technology,
and of the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense,
it has obtained the services of outside consultants, such as the Rand Corporation,
International Business Machines Corporation, and a panel of psychiatric and psychological experts.
It has received assistance also from data processing experts at the CIA
and from a specialist in psychiatric prognostication at Walter Reed Hospital.
As a result of these studies, the planning document submitted by the Secretary of the Treasury to the Bureau of the Budget on August 31,
1964, makes several significant recommendations in this field.
Based on the Commission's investigation, the following minimum goals for improvements are indicated:
Broader and more selective criteria
Since the assassination, both the Secret Service and the FBI have recognized
that the PRS files can no longer be limited largely to persons communicating actual threats to the President.
On December 26, 1963, the FBI circulated additional instructions to all its agents,
specifying criteria for information to be furnished to the Secret Service in addition to that covered by the former standard,
which was the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President.
he new instructions require FBI agents to report immediately information concerning, quote,
Subversives, ultrarightists, racists and fascists (a) possessing emotional instability or irrational behavior,
(b) who have made threats of bodily harm against officials or employees of Federal, state or local government or officials of a foreign government,
(c) who express or have expressed strong or violent anti-U.S. sentiments
and who have been involved in bombing or bomb-making or whose past conduct indicates tendencies toward violence, and (d)
whose prior acts or statements depict propensity for violence and hatred against organized government, end quote.
Alan H. Belmont, Assistant to the Director of the FBI, testified that this revision was initiated by the FBI itself.
The volume of references to the Secret Service has increased substantially since the new instructions went into effect;
more than 5,000 names were referred to the Secret Service in the first 4 months of 1964.
According to Chief Rowley, by mid-June 1964,
the Secret Service had received from the FBI some 9,000 reports on members of the Communist Party.
The FBI now transmits information on all defectors, a category which would, of course, have included Oswald.
Both Director Hoover and Belmont expressed to the Commission the great concern of the FBI, which is shared by the Secret Service,
that referrals to the Secret Service under the new criteria might, if not properly handled,
result in some degree of interference with the personal liberty of those involved.
They emphasized the necessity that the information now being furnished be handled with judgment and care.
The Commission shares this concern.
The problem is aggravated by the necessity that the Service obtain the assistance of local law enforcement officials in evaluating the information which it receives
and in taking preventive steps.
In June 1964, the Secret Service sent to a number of Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies
guidelines for an experimental program to develop more detailed criteria.
The suggestions of Federal agencies for revision of these guidelines were solicited.
The new tentative criteria are useful in making clear that
the interest of the Secret Service goes beyond information on individuals or groups threatening to cause harm or embarrassment to the President.
Information is requested also concerning individuals or groups who have demonstrated an interest in the President
or, quote, other high government officials in the nature of a complaint coupled with an expressed or implied determination to use a means,
other than legal or peaceful, to satisfy any grievance, real or imagined.
Under these criteria, whether the case should be referred to the Secret Service depends on the existence of a previous history of mental instability,
propensity toward violent action, or some similar characteristic, coupled with some evaluation of the capability of the individual or group
to further the intention to satisfy a grievance by unlawful means.
While these tentative criteria are a step in the right direction,
they seem unduly restrictive in continuing to require some manifestation of animus against a Government official.
It is questionable whether such criteria would have resulted in the referral of Oswald to the Secret Service.
Chief Rowley believed that they would,
because of Oswald's demonstrated hostility toward the Secretary of the Navy in his letter of January 30, 1962. Quote,
I shall employ all means to right this gross mistake or injustice to a bona fide U.S. citizen and ex-service man.
The U.S. government has no charges or complaints against me.
I ask you to look into this case and take the necessary steps to repair the damage done to me and my family. End quote.
Even with the advantage of hindsight, this letter does not appear to express or imply Oswald's, quote,
determination to use a means, other than legal or peaceful, to satisfy his grievance, end quote, within the meaning of the new criteria.
It is apparent that a good deal of further consideration and experimentation will be required before adequate criteria can be framed.
The Commission recognizes that no set of meaningful criteria will yield the names of all potential assassins. Charles J. Guiteau,
Leon F. Czolgosz,
John Schrank, and Guiseppe Zangara -- four assassins or would-be assassins
were all men who acted alone in their criminal acts against our leaders. None had a serious record of prior violence.
Each of them was a failure in his work and in his relations with others, a victim of delusions and fancies which led to the conviction
that society and its leaders had combined to thwart him. It will require every available resource of our Government
to devise a practical system which has any reasonable possibility of revealing such malcontents.
Liaison with other agencies regarding intelligence.
The Secret Service's liaison with the agencies that supply information to it has been too casual.
Since the assassination, the Service has recognized that these relationships must be far more formal
and each agency given clear understanding of the assistance which the Secret Service expects.
Once the Secret Service has formulated its new standards for collection of information, it should enter into written agreements with each Federal agency
and the leading State and local agencies that might be a source of such information.
Such agreements should describe in detail the information which is sought, the manner in which it will be provided to the Secret Service,
and the respective responsibilities for any further investigation that may be required.
This is especially necessary with regard to the FBI and CIA,
which carry the major responsibility for supplying information about potential threats,
particularly those arising from organized groups, within their special jurisdiction.
Since these agencies are already obliged constantly to evaluate the activities of such groups,
they should be responsible for advising the Secret Service if information develops indicating the existence of an assassination plot
and for reporting such events as a change in leadership or dogma which indicate that the group may present a danger to the President.
Detailed formal agreements embodying these arrangements should be worked out between the Secret Service and both of these agencies.
It should be made clear that the Secret Service will in no way seek to duplicate the intelligence
and investigative capabilities of the agencies now operating in this field but will continue
to use the data developed by these agencies to carry out its special duties.
Once experience has been gained in implementing such agreements with the Federal and leading State and local agencies,
the Secret Service, through its field offices,
should negotiate similar arrangements with such other State and local law enforcement agencies as may provide meaningful assistance.
Much useful information will come to the attention of local law enforcement agencies in the regular course of their activities,
and this source should not be neglected by undue concentration on relationships with other Federal agencies.
Finally, these agreements with Federal and local authorities will be of little value
unless a system is established for the frequent formal review of activities thereunder. In this regard
the Commission notes with approval several recent measures taken and proposed by the Secret Service to improve its liaison arrangements.
In his testimony Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon informed the Commission
that an interagency committee has been established to develop more effective criteria.
According to Secretary Dillon,
the Committee will include representatives of the President's Office of Science and Technology, Department of Defense, CIA,
FBI, and the Secret Service.
In addition, the Department of the Treasury has requested five additional agents for its Protective Research Section
to serve as liaison officers with law enforcement and intelligence agencies. On the basis of the Department's review during the past several months,
Secretary Dillon testified that the use of such liaison officers is the only effective way to insure that adequate liaison is maintained.
As a beginning step to improve liaison with local law enforcement officials, the Secret Service on August 26, 1964,
directed its field representatives to send a form request for intelligence information to all local,
county, and State law enforcement agencies in their districts.
Each of these efforts appears sound,
and the Commission recommends that these and the other measures suggested by the Commission be pursued vigorously by Secret Service.
Automatic data processing
Unless the Secret Service is able to deal rapidly and accurately with a growing body of data,
the increased information supplied by other agencies will be wasted.
PRS must develop the capacity to classify its subjects on a more sophisticated basis than the present geographic breakdown.
Its present manual filing system is obsolete;
it makes no use of the recent developments in automatic data processing which are widely used in the business world and in other Government offices.
The Secret Service and the Department of the Treasury now recognize this critical need.
In the planning document currently under review by the Bureau of the Budget, the Department recommends that it be permitted to hire five qualified persons, quote,
to plan and develop a workable and efficient automated file and retrieval system, end quote.
Also the Department requests the sum of $100,000 to conduct a detailed feasibility study;
this money would be used to compensate consultants, to lease standard equipment or to purchase specially designed pilot equipment.
On the basis of such a feasibility study,
the Department hopes to design a practical system which will fully meet the needs of the Protective Research Section of the Secret Service.
The Commission recommends that prompt and favorable consideration be given to this request.
The Commission further recommends that the Secret Service coordinate its planning as closely as possible with all of the Federal agencies from which it receives information.
The Secret Service should not and does not plan to develop its own intelligence gathering facilities to duplicate the existing facilities of other Federal agencies.
In planning its data processing techniques,
the Secret Service should attempt to develop a system compatible with those of the agencies from which most of its data will come. Note:
In evaluating data processing techniques of the Secret Service,
the Commission had occasion to become informed, to a limited extent, about the data processing techniques of other Federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
The Commission was struck by the apparent lack of effort, on an interagency basis,
to develop coordinated and mutually compatible systems, even where such coordination would not seem inconsistent
with the particular purposes of the agency involved. The Commission recognizes that this is a controversial area
and that many strongly held views are advanced in resistance to any suggestion that an effort be made to impose any degree of coordination.
This matter is obviously beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission,
but it seems to warrant further study before each agency becomes irrevocably committed to separate action.
The Commission, therefore, recommends that the President consider ordering an inquiry into the possibility
that coordination might be achieved to a greater extent than seems now to be contemplated, without interference with the primary mission of each agency involved.
Protective Research participation in advance arrangements.
Since the assassination, Secret Service procedures have been changed to require that a member of PRS accompany each advance survey team
to establish liaison with local intelligence gathering agencies and to provide for the immediate evaluation of information received from them.
This PRS agent will also be responsible for establishing an informal local liaison committee
to make certain that all protective intelligence activities are coordinated.
Based on its experience during this period, the Secret Service now recommends that additional personnel be made available to PRS
so that these arrangements can be made permanent without adversely affecting the operations of the Service's field offices.
The Commission regards this as a most useful innovation and urges that the practice be continued.
Liaison With Local Law Enforcement Agencies
Advice by the Secret Service to local police in metropolitan areas relating to the assistance expected in connection with a Presidential visit
has hitherto been handled on an informal basis.
The Service should consider preparing formal explanations of the cooperation anticipated during a Presidential visit to a city,
in formats that can be communicated to each level of local authorities.
Thus, the local chief of police could be given a master plan, prepared for the occasion, of all protective measures to be taken during the visit;
each patrolman might be given a prepared booklet of instructions explaining what is expected of him. The Secret Service has expressed concern
that written instructions might come into the hands of local newspapers, to the prejudice of the precautions described.
However, the instructions must be communicated to the local police in any event and can be leaked to the press whether or not they are in writing.
More importantly, the lack of carefully prepared and carefully transmitted instructions for typical visits to cities
can lead to lapses in protection, such as the confusion in Dallas about whether members of the public were permitted on overpasses.
Such instructions will not fit all circumstances, of course,
and should not be relied upon to the detriment of the imaginative application of judgment in special cases.
Inspection of Buildings
Since the assassination of President Kennedy, the Secret Service has been experimenting with new techniques in the inspection of buildings along a motorcade route.
According to Secretary Dillon,
the studies indicate that there is some utility in attempting to designate certain buildings as involving a higher risk than others.
The Commission strongly encourages these efforts to improve protection along a motorcade route.
The Secret Service should utilize the personnel of other Federal law enforcement offices
in the locality to assure adequate manpower for this task, as it is now doing.
Lack of adequate resources is an unacceptable excuse for failing to improve advance precautions
in this crucial area of Presidential protection.
Secret Service Personnel and Facilities
Testimony and other evidence before the Commission
suggest that the Secret Service is trying to accomplish its job with too few people and without adequate modern equipment.
Although Chief Rowley does not complain about the pay scale for Secret Service agents,
salaries are below those of the FBI and leading municipal police forces.
The assistant to the Director of the FBI testified that
the caseload of each FBI agent averaged 20 to 25, and he felt that this was high.
Chief Rowley testified that the present workload of each Secret Service agent averages 110.1 cases.
While these statistics relate to the activities of Secret Service agents stationed in field offices and not the White House detail,
field agents supplement those on the detail, particularly when the President is traveling.
Although the Commission does not know whether the cases involved are entirely comparable,
these figures suggest that the agents of the Secret Service are substantially overworked.
In its budget request for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1964,
the Secret Service sought funds for 25 new positions, primarily in field offices. This increase has been approved by the Congress.
Chief Rowley explained that this would not provide enough additional manpower to take all the measures which he considers required.
However, the 1964 to 65 budget request was submitted in November 1963
and requests for additional personnel were not made because of the studies then being conducted.
The Secret Service has now presented its recommendations to the Bureau of the Budget. The plan proposed by the Service
would take approximately 20 months to implement and require expenditures of approximately $3,000,000 during that period.
The plan provides for an additional 205 agents for the Secret Service. Seventeen of this number are proposed for the Protective Research Section;
145 are proposed for the field offices to handle the increased volume of security investigations
and be available to protect the President or Vice President when they travel;
18 agents are proposed for a rotating pool which will go through an intensive training cycle and also be available to supplement the White House detail
in case of unexpected need; and 25 additional agents are recommended to provide the Vice President full protection.
The Commission urges that the Bureau of the Budget review these recommendations with the Secret Service and authorize a request for the necessary supplemental appropriation,
as soon as it can be justified. The Congress has often stressed that it will support any reasonable request for funds for the protection of the President.
Manpower and Technical Assistance From Other Agencies
Before the assassination the Secret Service infrequently requested other Federal law enforcement agencies to provide personnel
to assist in its protection functions.
Since the assassination, the Service has experimented with the use of agents borrowed for short periods from such agencies.
It has used other Treasury law enforcement agents on special experiments in building and route surveys in places to which the President frequently travels.
It has also used other Federal law enforcement agents during Presidential visits to cities in which such agents are stationed.
Thus, in the 4 months following the assassination,
the FBI, on 16 separate occasions, supplied a total of 139 agents to assist in protection work during a Presidential visit,
which represents a departure from its prior practice.
From February 11 through June 30, 1964,
the Service had the advantage of 9,500 hours of work by other enforcement agencies.
The FBI has indicated that it is willing to continue to make such assistance available,
even though it agrees with the Secret Service that it is preferable for the Service to have enough agents to handle all protective demands.
The Commission endorses these efforts to supplement the Service's own personnel by obtaining, for short periods of time,
the assistance of trained Federal law enforcement officers.
In view of the ever-increasing mobility of American Presidents, it seems unlikely that the Service could or should increase its own staff to a size
which would permit it to provide adequate protective manpower for all situations.
The Commission recommends that the agencies involved determine how much periodic assistance they can provide, and that each such agency
and the Secret Service enter into a formal agreement defining such arrangements.
It may eventually be desirable to codify the practice in an Executive order.
The Secret Service will be better able to plan its own long-range personnel requirements if it knows with reasonable certainty
the amount of assistance that it can expect from other agencies.
The occasional use of personnel from other Federal agencies to assist in protecting the President has a further advantage. It symbolizes the reality
that the job of protecting the President has not been and cannot be exclusively the responsibility of the Secret Service.
The Secret Service in the past has sometimes guarded its right to be acknowledged as the sole protector of the Chief Executive.
This no longer appears to be the case.
Protecting the President is a difficult and complex task which requires full use of the best resources of many parts of our Government.
Recognition that the responsibility must be shared increases the likelihood that it will be met.
Much of the Secret Service work requires the development and use of highly sophisticated equipment,
some of which must be specially designed to fit unique requirements. Even before the assassination, and to a far greater extent thereafter,
the Secret Service has been receiving full cooperation in scientific research and technological development
from many Government agencies including the Department of Defense and the President's Office of Science and Technology.
Even if the manpower and technological resources of the Secret Service are adequately augmented,
it will continue to rely in many respects upon the greater resources of the Office of Science and Technology and other agencies.
The Commission recommends that the present arrangements
with the Office of Science and Technology and the other Federal agencies that have been so helpful to the Secret Service be placed on a permanent and formal basis.
The exchange of letters dated August 31, 1964,
between Secretary Dillon and Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, is a useful effort in the right direction.
The Service should negotiate a memorandum of understanding with each agency that has been assisting it and from which it can expect to need help in the future.
The essential terms of such memoranda might well be embodied in an Executive order.
This Commission can recommend no procedures for the future protection of our Presidents which will guarantee security.
The demands on the President in the execution of His responsibilities in today's world are so varied and complex
and the traditions of the office in a democracy such as ours are so deep-seated as to preclude absolute security.
The Commission has, however, from its examination of the facts of President Kennedy's assassination
made certain recommendations which it believes would, if adopted,
materially improve upon the procedures in effect at the time of President Kennedy's assassination and result in a substantial lessening of the danger.
As has been pointed out, the Commission has not resolved all the proposals which could be made. The Commission nevertheless is confident that,
with the active cooperation of the responsible agencies and with the understanding of the people of the United States in their demands upon their President,
the recommendations we have here suggested would greatly advance the security of the office without any impairment of our fundamental liberties.

